(5 of 260)

Cerebral physiology.

Volume 2.
pages 161-
References

(6 of 260)

161.

level. Now it has been shown that a rat with its gonads removed and those
of the opposite sex transplanted, ceases to notice the opposite sex, but 
treats its own sex as if it were itself altered i.e. if a female rat with 
ovaries exercised and testicles transplanted treats the other females as if it 
were a male. Now this will make out the gross, and probably the (?)
anatomy idea since obviously no gross change has occurred here. It 
also makes out a theory I had, that the instinct may develop from, and be 
derived from the original distribution and properties of the receptors; for obviously
the rat has not had time to be reeducated from the beginning. It looks,
therefore, as though one must set to work to show that given certain
function rules, the instinct must develop; and that the instinct lies in 
each cell of virtue of its nature and functions. Of course, instinct and all 
these other psychological concepts may be very simple psychologically, but are 
extremely complex when reduced to neurons. The act of walking, for instance,
simple though it may appear to observe, nevertheless, is exceedingly complex
when reduced to neurons, probably too complex to be described in actuality
even if one knows the laws etc; the details would be colossal. So much 
the more so is instinct complicated and the details here would be almost
infinitely complicated. Such things as instincts etc are too hopelessly 
complicated at present to reduce to neurons. To find our function rules
we must get down to reflexes, write and acquired, and try to master this 
field before getting on to the next.

_____

 (7 of 260)
 
 162.
 
 28.7.30
 
 Note on spare-time and reality. I see that Einstein is coming to the conclusion
 that the basis of all is mind. That all can be reduced to space - 
 time, and that this is probably simply a projection of mind. This correspond
 with the idea put forward by Thomson (Ref 86, p. 234). Here he comes to 
 the conclusion that the only primary reality is that of sensation. "What 
 one actually perceives has an instant reality at the moment of perception from 
 which there is no escape. It does not matter if it turns out afterwards to have 
 been a dream or hallucination, at least the perceiving was real. The 
 next stage (of "reality") comes when one tries to piece together a number of 
 perceptions and form an object." "The chain of commonsense, as opposed 
 to a single perception of it, is a geometrical abstraction erected in the mind 
 to unify the perceptions and make it possible to act on them in a rational
 and useful manner." This, of course, does not simplify my task!
 
 ______
 
 28.7.30.
 
 Now, treating people as machines, it is, I hope, possible to work out the 
 mechanisms. But there is one argument that is succeedingly diffiuclt to 
 explain, and which can only be dealt with by introspection. It is 
 this - I take people and show that they are machines, merely a nerve-
 net perhaps. Others will take me and analyse me and show that I am 
 also a nerve net, reaching for certain reasons to certain stimuli. But 
 there seems to be an "essential" I, and I am much deeper than the I 
 that reacts to food, to pain, to sex. I may ask, why, for instance
 was I born of the two parents I have and not of any other two?
 
 But, just a minute; my whole scientific training revolts against
 
 (8 of 260)
 
 163.
 
 this. The answer must be, it is the result of self observation.
 It is typically developed in the introvert. An extrovert would not 
 think of such a query. Self observation, therefore, seems to lead 
 to a sort of circle, and out of the confusion of the circle such 
 ideas are born. I know I exist merely because I observe
 myself, just as I know that anything else exists - because I 
 have seen and left and observed it. Away, therefore, with such 
 questions. They are the products of self observation, of the mind 
 reacting to itself, and getting in a tangle in so doing. Introspection
 leads to an exaltation of the ego.
 
 _______
 
 It is usually assumed, in a very vague way, that a nerve cell only carries one 
 impulse at a time, but this is probably only determined by the refractory period.
 Thus in the frog, the velocities of impulse and refractory periods are given together 
 with the distance at which one impulse may follow another.
 
         Fibre type        Absolute ref. period        Normal ref. period        Velocity of impulse cm/sec        Distance between impulses cm.
           x               1.20                        c 6.00                      4730                            28.4
           B               1.68                        c 8.40                      2870                            24.1
           y               3.13                        c 15.65                     1900                            29.7
		   

	(Adapted from Ref. 17)
	
This means that in the frog, two impulses probably do not occur in the same
nerve fibre at the same time, but there is no a priori reason against it, and given
a long nerve, a slow velocity, and a short refractory period, then it can occur,

(9 of 260)

164. 

provided that the receptor (under normal stimulation) has a small refractory period.
If this is long, however, then it will very effectively prevent overlapping, as the 
impulse will have left the nerve at the other end before it is ready to put a 
second impulse in.

_____

3.8.1930

Note on the "ego" and its development. It is Stout (Ref. 87 p. 90), who shows,
I think quite rightly, that the essential difference between the ego and the 
id, is that the person can control the ego but cannot control the id. The
second he can control the id, then it becomes part of the ego. Of course,
the vast amount of stuff around as is only partially controllable and is therefore
only partially a part of the ego. A motor can, for instance, can be started
up at will and is thus part of the ego. But it will not speak and is thus partly
relegated to the id. It may be said in general that if impulses are sent out
with the idea of getting back certain other stimuli, then, if the desired 
stimuli arrive, all is well and the ego has expanded and that object, whether 
hand, motor car, or moon; but if the stimuli desired do not return, then 
it is relegated to the id.

I think that not enough attention is paid to the part played by 
the after returning stimuli in determining the reactions of the C.N.S.

_____
5.8.30

Today, after reading Brath (Ref 88) I have made my decision, and will 
accept spiritualism. I think that to refuse to take the plunge when one is 
convinced is more cowardice.

_____

(10 of 250)

165.

I notice that I have no reference to Lashby's "Brain injuries and intelligence"
where he describes maze tests with notes and intelligence. I write it in here
for convenience. (Ref. 95).

_________

I have just read a statement by Oliver Lodge. He believes that life is 
all around in the space around us, but that it can only show itself often 
and contact with matter; that just as energy exists in space but can only 
make itself visible to us by acting on matter, so life also needs living
things to make itself visible. It has occurred to me that life consists very 
largely in the development of elaborate and exceedingly delicate trigger
mechanisms, especially in the nervous system. This is most clearly seen
in the brain of man where the movement of a few atoms may set thousands
of men working shifting millions of tons of earth, say. With delicate
triggers like this one is getting down to molecular and atomic orders of
magnitude and here the normal law of statistical constancy will no longer
hold. Here then is the obvious place for spirits around, or life,
or what you will, to step in a seize control, for by so doing,
by getting in on an exceedingly sensitive trigger, they will get 
below "statistical" levels and will be able to juggle with "key" electrons
without interfering with the laws of nature. This would explain why
the solar system is so free from indifference by spirits (i.e. the number
of atoms is so huge that the constancy of the mean is within exceedingly
narrow limits.), on the other hand, a delicately balanced instrument like 
man's brain would offer vast scope for control.

(11 of 260)

166.

A fascinating idea which must be investigated much more fully
as it seems to offer a connecting link between neurology, psychology
and the supernormal.

_______

Ref. 96. consists of one number of the Psychological Bulletin devoted entirely
to references to the rat.

_______

Herrick says (Ref. 92, p. 269) re the unconscious : - "It is familiar
observation that our choicest thoughts, our happiest literary conceits and fantasies 
and at times in the course of scientific investigation our most fructifying
hypotheses thus come of themselves without consciously directed effort."

i.e. they come up out of the unconscious. Now there are just the sort of 
thing which might be expected to come, not form spinal cord to cortex,
but from the spirits to cortex. May we therefore represent the 
state of affairs not by the ordinary.


cortex           - unconscious, - thalamus, - spinal cord - environment 
conscious mind 

We might substitute : - 

spirits - unconscious - [cortex / conscious mind] - spinal cord - environment 

Note that the depths of the unconscious (hypothesis, (?)) do not seem to lead down to the
knee jerk, they seem to lead into the spirit-world, race-conscious 
etc.

_______

(12 of 260)

167.

1.11.30

Now to apply the financial system to the brain so as to obtain our 
"function rules" we must first decide on what is the basic 
function made guiding the individual in the financial system.
This is obviously "each person shall always behave so as to 
obtain the maximum produce." Now this is exactly what the 
financial system is doing in its big way, i.e. each unit does the 
same in its small way as the larger system is trying to do in its
big way. To turn to nerve cells, we therefore postulate - "Each 
nerve cell tries to do the same as the larger system in its way."

Now what is the organism as a whole trying to do? To obtain
"equilibrium," to obtain peace and quiet, to explain its chemical energy
or what?

Almost certainly we may assume that it is trying to obtain
peace and quiet where it may rest and grow without let or hindrance.
Usually it is keep on the go by the demands of the environment and 
also by the demands of the (?) cells etc (driving it is food etc).
Imagine a healthy amoeba after a good meal. Does start rushing 
about, or thinking hard of higher things? No, it just sits and eats, 
perfectly contented. Presently, however, the call of hunger arises and 
the other parts of its body drive it off to seek for food in order that 
the others may be at peace. So it murmurs "This darn stomach 
never lets me eat for long" and off it goes. Now, it may be asked,
why does not an animal, if it wants peace, learn to ignore the calls of 
nature? The answer lies in the fact that an animal which ignores

(13 of 260)

168. 

hunger just dies of starvation. Natural selection will therefore see
to it that the nerve cells of the stomach shout out and stir up the 
animal when it is hungry. Therefore we may say with certainty 
that natural selection will plant in the animal various nerve cells,
internal and external, which will always should when the animal is 
hurt or starving, or thirsty, or needing defecation etc. We may 
therefore take these as our basis and conclude that the nervous
system will always try to adjust itself so that it receives peace for 
the torments without and within. This we will describe as 
our solution of the problem of finding the fundamental function-rule 
of the C.N.S. We will call it the principle of paciphilia (note that 
this needs altering as pax is Latin and philos is Greek - still it will do till 
I can find out the Greek for peace). (?) is a better word 
perhaps so I will use that.

The next thing to work out is - what practical methods do the neurons 
use to try and attain this state?

_______

5.11.30

I reading some psychoanalytic literature this afternoon, reading particularly about 
the child's reaction to the breast and how its reaction to it will determine whether 
the child grow up as an optimist or a pessimist. It struck me more forcibly 
than before that the mental development of the child is a question of the 
graduation elaboration of differentiation. The child's first few reactions are 
fundamental and permanently determines the future head of its character.
Psychotherapy, with its getting right back into childhood and correcting some 

(14 of 260)

169.

small childish error of reaction shows this very clearly - that a reaction
when very young permanently modifies the child's C.N.S., so that 
all subsequent reactions merely elaborate the same directional trend, it 
cannot modify it without going right back to childhood and making a fresh
start. We may imagine that the child when conceived is a point in 
space - its behaviour we may consider as direction-selections.
Its first reaction determines in which plane all subsequent reactions
will lie, its next reaction determines the quadrant, and so it 
goes on lending more and more to a straight line. The direction of the 
straight line from the origin is determined by any reaction in
inverse proportion to the distance (in time) of that reaction from the 
origin. We may represent this by a diagram, a vector ds represents
the excitement in character, or "modification" produced by one reaction,
we have

Fig. 1. (hand-drawn diagram)

Naturally the position in
space of any end point
A will be determined above
all by the direction of 
the first reaction. Note
that here we should add
a second postulate to 
prevent the "character-time" from turning back on itself. Let us postulate
an additional postulate - that the reaction-direction at any point
cannot turn back so that the position at the end of the reaction is nearer

(15 of 260)

170.

the origin than the beginning of the reaction. Suppose now that the patient
has reached point A and that it is decided that he is all wrong and must 
got to A^1, then he cannot turn directly from A to A^1, he must first 
go right back to B, and then start off from there to reach A^1. Naturally,
the further one goes back, the easier will the development B -> A^1 
be, from one must obviously consider that the natural path is a radius
from the origin - the greater the angle cutting across this, the more
difficult is the journey.

Now it has just struck me that if A^1 were the same distance from O 
as is A, then the person might conceivably climb around on a circle from 
A to A^1. From the psychological point of view we would see that the 
person, having a fundamental character of O-A, would be reacting like 
an O-A^1. Since this is, ex hypothesis, quite a different 
direction of reaction from OA, we may say on clinical psychological
observation, that that person will be a very poorly adapted person who 
is living an unnatural life and therefore under great conditions of strain.
We may therefore draw the further important conclusion that for perfect
consistency of character, and therefore for perfect freedom from strain 
the person's character-line must be a straight line. Obviously, therefore,
to turn the person from A to A^1 the only perfect way is to 
go right back to O and start again. Of course it may happen 
that the individual's early reactions were in the direction of A^1 but that 
it turned off at D. (see Fig). In such a case, it will only be 
necessary to go back to D. in such a case

(hand-drawn diagram)

(16 of 260)

171.

psychoanalysis back to O will show that the stretch O-D was normal
and satisfactory. It will also, naturally, discover that at D something 
occurred which permanently altered the direction of the reactions
so that the character-line went to A instead of A^1. Further we may 
say that if D is near to A and A^1, that the person is suffering from 
a neurosis, if it is near to O, then they will be suffering from 
a psychosis (from the analytic point of view).

This same concept, more or less, has important consequences in 
the theory of C.N.S. reaction development (i.e. in the physiological 
as apart from the psychological point of view). It is 1 am however 
so I must stop. I may say here that for some time I have had 
the idea that it might be possible to work out a mathematics 
of psychology based on direction instead of on quantity. Hence the 
books on Vector calculus, Vector and rotors, absolute differential calculus 
etc. 

______

12.11.30.

I have been thinking over my theories with regard to intelligence and the 
financial system, and I have now no doubt in my own mind that - 
"A group of units may exhibit an intelligence greater than the intelligence
of any one unit thereof and that this result may be achieved by the 
adoption by each unit of a set of function rules which shall be followed
fluidly and completely."

So far I have considered the possibility of this occurring. I have 
concluded that this is possible. One must now consider and elaborate

(17 of 260)

172. 

the laws of the function rules, for the selection of the right function rules is 
of the greatest importance.

The first question to consider is the number of function rules. Of this,
at the moment I am not certain. There are three possibilities, I
think : - 

a) There may be one function rule.
b) There may be several function rules all logically deducible 
from one basic function rule (like the many gas laws
(Charles', Boyle's etc) all logically deducible from one 
fundamental law, namely the dynamics of 
molecules).
or c) There may be several independent function rules.

Now almost certainly we may say that a) is the only really 
correct assumption since it seems probably that all 
phenomena may ultimately be reduced to Einstein's space-time equations. 
Nevertheless, in practise b) or c) is much more likely to be the apparent
state of affairs, especially c), since so often the analysis down to 
fundamentals is extremely complicated and often impossible at present. The 
only thing, of course, is to examine cerebration and decide which one, a, b, or c represents 
the state of affairs best. If a) or b) turns up, then we may 
call the state of knowledge very satisfactory and the subject with be 
almost closed. On the other hand if c) seems to be the state of 
affairs, then it will be extremely complicated and difficult, because of  

(18 of 260)

173. 

the possibility that one rule may contradict another. But this question
of contradiction requires a much closer analysis, especially as it obviously
may play a part in insanity.

First, if there is only one function rule, then it is obvious that 
there can be no contradiction. We may take the example of a 
human being in whom there is implanted the function rule - 
thou shalt avoid pain. We now stick a pin in him posteriorly
about half way down - he leaps forward - a purposive and 
intelligent action. Now suppose we stick pins in him both in 
front and behind so that he can move neither forwards not backwards, what happens? Does chaos ensue or does it not?
The answer is "no, chaos does not ensue," for the environment is such 
that there is no intelligent reply. One must remember continually that 
not every problem in the environment can be solved, i.e. it is no good 
throwing an earwig in a furnace and then saying "Now explain to me 
how his nervous system will react so as to get him out." The answer 
is that he cannot get out. All we can expect of intelligence is 
that if there is an escape, then it must find it, always
remembering that if the line of escape is too complicated then it does 
not count as one, even though it may actually exist. e.g. an 
earwig starving with food locked in a safe cannot be expected to 
understand the lock and to pick it - as far as the earwig is concerned 
there is no solution. We must therefore decide that intelligence 
has failed only when there was a solution which the "unit" might 
have been expected to find but did not. If the man, for instance,

(19 of 260)

174. 

when hurt posteriorly, had not sprung forward but had remained 
on the pin not knowing what to do, then we may say that 
intelligence has failed. We must always remember that the quantity 
of intelligence available is of as much importance in any given problem 
as its presence or absence. 

Very well. We see then that if there is only one function
rule there can be no essential contradiction, although the 
result may be nil if the environment is too difficult.

In all cases (a,b, or c) if the environment is too difficult the 
result will failure so that we need not consider this case
any further at present (although later we must come back and consider
it). We will therefore only consider cases where the environment 
offers a problem which can be solved if the organism does its best,
and where the only cause for failure is a breakdown of the 
internal mechanisms.

Now we will reconsider the possibilities of internal
contradiction. (This seems to be closely related to conflict).

Now if a) is the case. In this case we can be fairly confident 
that the system will work smoothly and efficiently to a solution. This 
is happening all day both in the C.N.S. and in the financial system. The 
man who springs forward from the pin is an example - the reaction is 
smooth, purposive, efficient.

Now if b) is the case. This is much more complex and difficult to 
answer. I must think this over.

_______

(20 of 260)

175.

18.11.30 

It just occurs to me that the main arteries of the brain nowhere perforate 
bang through the cortex. One thinks naturally that a large artery 
going through the cortex would upset any pattern travelling through 
the cortex there, just as a rock in the sea will modify the pattern 
of waves passing. Now the two systems of blood supply, basal or 
internal and cortical or external meet in the 3rd and 4th layers. It 
suggests therefore that these layers, or one of them are concerned 
with the shifting patterns and that the action of the others is local,
perhaps modifying the pattern as it passes below it.

Note on Steward (Ref. 25) p. 43. Here he states definitely that the 
basal cortical vessels do not anastomose, so that there must be a 
layer of either zero or appreciable thickness between them through 
which no vessel passes. I must look up the mental symptomatology
of Huntingdon's chorea and carbon monoxide poisoning, both of which
cause destruction of this layer.

Also (Ref. 25. p. 4$) what is the significance of the same thing in 
the spine? (Thick line - line through which no vessel passes)

(hand-drawn diagram)

(21 of 260)

176. 

Note that this hypothesis of cortical function allows some localisation 
and some "equipotentiality" - it will fit that question all right.
Note that this latter part is really quite independent of the "arterial 
supply" hypothesis.

This principle may also apply to the cerebellum.

_________

18.11.30.

Note that in squinting one eye always develops a "functional" blindness.
This, when one thinks of it is a most amazingly intelligent thing to do, for 
there is no a priori reason why the C.N.S. should "know" that this was to be 
done and how to do it - there is no reason why the person should not 
go on suffering form diplopia indefinitely. Nevertheless the C.N.S.
does inhibit one eye (note that it is not one field of vision) and I believe 
that it always does it. Note that normally the two impressions are 
not quite the same (hence stereoscopy) but that this does not lead 
to a unilateral blindness. There is a moral here for those who can
read between the lines.

__________

21.11.30

Have just been to a dance followed by supper at which everybody sang! Result - 
complete inhibition. Obviously I belong to Pavlov's "inhibitable" type. 
Given strong and multitudinous stimuli and I pass steadily into inhibition.
On the other hand given quiet and a few gentle stimuli and I am highly 
active. It is obvious that, as a general principle, excess stimuli give rise 
to inhibition. The energy of the inhibition obviously comes from the stimuli

(22 of 260)

177. 

themselves. Now there is no fundamental difference between the inhibitable
and excitable types (Pavlov) - it is purely a question of degree. Therefore
we may conclude as a general principle that active energy increases 
with the stimuli to a point but after that, an increase in stimuli
results in a decrease of activity, due to increasing inhibition. In a 
graphical form : - 

(hand-drawn graph)

or in algebraic form (d^2a) / (ds^2) = negative. Now this is the beauty of the 
phenomenon -- this result can also be explained by assuming that
there is a constant energy available but that stimuli cause inhibition 
and only inhibition and that this increases with the stimuli until eventually 
the two balance and activity becomes nil. This fits well with certain other 
hypotheses : -

a) The mental energy fits well with Spearman's "g" which is 
constant, and further, the inhibitable types tend to have more g 
than the excitable.

b) It agrees with my postulates of "adaptation by inhibition" and 
"minimal inhibition" which say that "excitation" or "energy" are  
constant and that all stimuli are reacted to by inhibition only.

(23 of 260)

178.

This also agrees with (?) Wilson's suggestion (Ref 178) - that the idea of 
"doing things" is fallacious - it is all a question of control and inhibition 
not of excitation. 

Note here, as query, - at stimuli = 0, activity should be 
maximal on this theory. * (see below).

This needs further elaboration - the hypotheses certainly fit well. 

_____

1.12.30.

Since writing my last note, my picture of the fundamental nervous 
system at work has cleaned itself up remarkably chiefly due to my recognition 
of the importance of the "echo" phenomenon.

I now picture the infant as a mere bundle of nerve cells in empty 
(and unknowable) space. Stimuli begin to arrive and are, at first
merely thrown out again. But this throwing out of the stimuli causes an 
echo phenomenon to appear. Other stimuli return, and are again thrown out 
and so the game proceeds. At first the stimuli appear to come at 
haphazard and thrown out at haphazard. But the echo phenomenon 
soon builds up a connection. "It is learnt" that throwing the impulse out
in one way leads to a particular type of echo phenomenon, while throwing it 
out in another way leads to a different type of echo. Now I think it is 
undeniable that some sort of law and order exists in the apparent chaos
of stimuli coming in. At first, the stimuli appearing must seem 
utterly chaotic and unpredictable. Nevertheless there are laws in the 
stimuli, some simple and some complex and the whole development of the 

*This may be filled by assuming y = activity = ax - bx^2 (x= strength of stimuli) so that activity increases 
steadily with stimulus but that increasing inhibition (proportional to x^2) overtakes it. At x = 0, y = 0 
so that no other constant is necessary. Inhibitable type = (graph), excitable type = (graph) both rising to same height at maximum.

(24 of 260)

179. 

mind is a process of discovering first the simple and later the more 
complex of these laws.

To start at the beginning again, since we are getting complicated,
the same network follows out, I believe, the principle of "virovanophilia".
The nerve network has within it certain simple function rules, put in it by 
heredity and evolution. It follows these rules in dealing with the 
stimuli and gradually becomes more and more efficient in its handling of 
the stimuli. This efficiency is only observable by the outsider. To the 
nerve net it probably appears as if the struggle with the endless stream 
of stimuli is merely never-ending. Yet just as in learning, one 
learns far faster than one realises, so does the nerve net become more 
and more efficient without realising it at all. All the time, in accordance 
with the function rules, the nerve net is continuously differentiation its 
neurons, its chronaxies, its synapses. It becomes continuously more and
more efficient without realising it - it is only the outsider who can observe
it. 

Now the beauty of this conception of the C.N.S. is that it will fit, not only
any animal or living thing, but any imaginary animal! Note that I 
have withdrawn attraction entirely from the environment. No longer will 
we talk of dogs barking at cats, or of looking at clocks, or of recognising
faces. According to my concept developed above we have a nerve 
net receiving stimuli. Of the origin of the stimuli I have nothing whatever
to say. It corresponds more to the position of a blind and deaf person, who 
lies isolated in space and who merely knows that "something touched his

(25 of 260)

180. 

back." The result of ignoring the environment and dealing only with 
stimuli so that we are now free from the arbitrary restricitons of the 
every day environment - we have freed our equations from an arbitrary 
constant in the words of mathematics. We deal now solely with stimuli.
With what causes the stimuli we have no interest.

It will be seen that we have now reduced our C.N.S. problem 
to a consideration of a small number of ideas: - 

1) A nerve net.
2) A set of function rules.
3) A main principle virovanophili.
4) An endless stream of stimuli pouring in.
5) The laws and regularities and periodicities etc of the stimuli. 
I believe I have included all the ideas necessary but am not sure. As before,
it is the function rules which remain the most difficult stumbling block, for 
they are the parameters which shall fit the general theorem to any given 
situation.

[It has just occurred to me that the above is not at all unlike Einstein's
fundamental equation - dx^2 + dy^2 + dz^2 - c^2dx^0 = ds^2 
The function rules correspond to the constraints of integration, ds^2 = 0 corresponds in a way 
to virovanophilia, and x, y, and z may refer to some of the other independent 
variables, the whole yielding on integration a "world time" just like the 
diagram on p. 169. Who knows? It may be possible. It is 
quite likely that the equation of the "world" may turn out to be just the 
essential equation of the mind which has created the world as a concept and 
projected it. Naturally the mind, when it examines this projection will

(26 of 260)

181.

find nothing but its own properties in it.]

5.12.30.

I have been collecting examples of the "echo" phenomenon. Here are 
some examples.

1) Ataxia, as in tubes. Here sense of movement is lost so that echo impulses 
no longer retain during movement.

2) Stewart, (Ref. 25, p. 141) "Re trigeminal anaesthesia" The trigeminal 
nerve has also sensory fibres for the facial muscles. Hence there 
is a degree of awkwardness and apparent weakness of the face - 
a pseudo-facial palsy, due to loss of hte sense of active muscle 
contraction."

3) Learning shows the influence of echo phenomena so profoundly that there 
is not soon to enter the subject here.

4) The steady disorganisation of speech after total deafness shows that 
 the cortex is always dependant upon the echo impulses to keep it 
steady and on the right lives. Same applies to ataxia [Therefore we 
may conclude that the cortex does not learn once and remember, say,
speech, indefinitely. On the contrary, the cortex gets adjusted properly
but is continuously tending to stray from the strait and narrow 
path and is being continuously corrected by the echo impulses*. Ha, ha! 
Beautiful! This is exactly like the condition in evolution where, say,
man is produced pretty well adapted to his environment, like speech, 
but only stays properly adapted provided he is continuously subjected 
to the correcting effect of the environment which acts like the 

*Note the extraordinary difference between this and the utter constancy and permanency 
of memories as revealed by psychoanalysis. This is something very unusual here.

(27 of 260)

182.

echo impulses. Therefore we may conclude that the cortex is indefinitely 
modifiable, and that it is entirely indifferent as to how it reacts, but that its 
reaction depends entirely on the environment, just like the morphological 
developments of life. But where, there, do the constants come in,
such things as reflexes, instincts etc?] 

5) Paralysis follows anaesthesia in hysteria (Brown and Stewart, Ref. 163)

6) p. 286 of the notes.

7) Echo impulses on arrival may coordinate and modify original stimulus, or they 
may reinforce it. The latter is shown in (?) where the echo impulses
from the urethra reinforce the original stimuli opening the sphincter and 
contracting the bladder wall. Here we have a "vicious" circle type of 
mechanism.

8) Impulses may go up to another centre, but this is not what I mean by echo 
phenomenon. In the latter, by definition, impulses return to original
place from which they started, but they obviously need not come 
from the same place as the original ones finished i.e. impulse goes 
to muscle, echo impulse may return from joints or skin, but it 
comes back to the same place. Now brain cannot be expected to know 
where the impulses have gone to, nor whence the echoes have come, 
so that obviously latter does not matter. On the other hand, the fact
that a cell or cells send out an impulse and promptly gets some back
will obviously be important.

_________

(28 of 260)

183.

5.12.30.

I saw a patient at Queen Sq. today, who complained that if he tried hard 
to do anything, such as trying to understand a sentence or to remember a name, 
his mind seemed to jam so that he could not think but just stared blankly 
and then he went off into a petit mal attack. In this he stood rigid as 
before for about a minute. This reminds one strongly of the ordinary results of 
trying hard to remember a name - the more one tries the less one gets.
It is not directed effort which is wanted but directed relaxation to allow it to 
come up. It reminds one of the law of something or other of the Cone-Nancy
school. It looks as though trying were really a question of adding more 
and more inhibition. Excitation is simple, it probably means means allowing 
the impulse an unobstructed passage. But in any given reaction there cannot
be a vast amount inhibited. One may gain some idea of the variety of 
possible other reactions which are inhibited by considering the vast number
of different ways in which any given stimulus would be reacted to by 
say, a thousand people, trying the stimulus on each one. The first person 
could have reacted with any one of these various ways of reacting, but he 
did not, therefore he inhibited all the rest.

(?) Wilson has pointed out that the question of voluntarily or 
non-voluntarily doing things is a concept of no objective value. Doing things it 
often much more a question of allowing them to happen. This is shown 
particularly well after pulling out one's tongue by taking it in again. One 
realises that one is much more allowing it to come back than pulling it 
back. i.e. as involuntary mechanism is trying to pull it back.
The cortex inhibits this at first and then disinhibits it with the result 

(29 of 260)

184. 

that the other mechanism promptly pulls the tongue in again.

_________

Riddoch (Ref. 179) has shown that after injury of the visual cortex, the 
appreciation of movement alone might be possible, at a time when 
neither the object moved nor any other object could be perceived. 

It occurs to me that this is very like the state of affairs when one 
stares fixedly at a scene for say a minute. One can then see little 
or nothing, but movement can at once be recognised. I used to regard 
the latter as being due to retinal fatigue, but the above makes it 
look much more as though it is a central, cortical phenomenon based
upon inhibition. A study of this might throw light upon the irradiation 
etc of inhibition. I have already been observing the "essential light"
of the retina when in bed from this point of view, but can discover 
little, chiefly owing to the lack of any technical method for slowing it down 
or preserving a permanent record.

Holmes and Horrax (Ref. 180) have found that injuries of the angular gyrus destroy 
stereoscopic vision, and they suggest that stereoscopic vision is "an 
intellectual operation based largely on non-visual experience, as on the testing
and controlling of visual perceptions by tactile and muscular sensations 
from all parts of the body." Visual and tactile impressions combine to form 
stereoscopic vision. Note that the area lies between the two other 
proojection areas of the cortex. Note that it may be developed there, not by 
anatomical predestination, but because that is the battleground over which the 
impulses range.

_______

(30 of 260)

185. 

5.12.30. 

Note, in tales, the impotence of early loss of sexual desire. This fact 
may give (?) the clue as to the origin of sex tension and the sex instinct.
Incidentally it is a little difficult at first sight to fit in masochism with 
(?)philia! 

_______

5.12.30.

Dissociation in hysteria may mean some sort of microscopic, anatomical 
dissociation between two parts of the cortex, the unconscious part being that 
part which is not connected with the different tracts so that it has no 
method of getting out. Now if the person has two personalities, on this 
scheme, each would have about half the cortex to roam over.

Re importance in tales, Stewart (Ref 25. p. 200) says "analgesia of the glans 
penis is another early sign of tubes, also loss of the normal tenderness of the 
testicle on pressure" [If the testicle is anaesthetic or analgesic, it would 
suggest that the vesicular seminales are probably anaesthetic] 
Stewart continues "acute inflammatory infections of the viscera, which in an ordinary 
individual are highly painful, may in certain tabetics (?) their course painlessly 
and even without rigidity of the superadjacent muscles.  ..... these facts
are probably to be explained by the presence of tabetic degeneration in the 
grey, afferent (?) communicates leading from the sympathetic to the 
posterior root ganglia."

_______

5.22.30 

The difference between lesions of the internal capsule and the motor cortex. 
Lesions of the motor cortex are apt to produce epileptic fits. Lesions of the 
internal capsule do not. Well then, what is the essential difference between 
the internal capsules and the motor cortex? As far as I can see there is 

(31 of 260)

186. 

only one - namely that the cortex has synapses whereas the internal capsule 
has none. This is an exceedingly important result as it at once lifts 
epilepsy out of the class of "cerebral anaemias", etc etc and localises it right 
down on the synapse. An epileptic fit must start at a synapse.

_______

Re the peripheral (penis, vesicular seminales) origin of sex instinct 
and sex-tension see Block (Ref. 130. pp. 46, 47,)

_______

7.12.30

Function-rules, the parameters by which we must fit our generalised nervous system 
in particular to animal kingdoms, to particular species, and to particular individuals. (p. 178)
I was running over a list of function rules the other day and I was collecting all the 
function rules which would have to be known i norder to deal adequately with any given 
nerve net. Let us start to make a list of some of the things which would have to be
known : - 

1) Whether resistance at synapse alters or not
2) If all synapses around one cell alter together or not.
3) Whether nerve cell sends impulses in all directions to the synapses or whether it 
directs them at all.
4) Whether impulse ever dies out in a cell or not.
5) Whether synapse resistance alters or not.
6) What alters the resistance 
7) Whether synapse ever lets half an impulse through
8) Whether chronaxy ever alters.
9) Whether chronaxy is always the same throughout the whole of one cell.

(32 of 260)

187.

10) Whether change in resistance at one synapse has any effect on other synapses
of the same neuron.
11. Whether change in chronaxy of one cell alters chronaxies of cells with which 
it is in contact.
12) Whether passage of an impulse affects cell's chronaxy or resistance.
13) Whether not receiving an impulse for some time affects cells.
14) Whether impulse ever gets from cell to cell not by synapse but by "induction"
15. Whether myelin sheath thickness has anything to do with this. 

And so we go on. Obviously the number of possible function rules is extremely large, far too 
large ever to get an absolutely list (one would be almost certain to forget one or 
two points). Secondly a large number of them are naturally exclusive so that one 
would have to select a certain number, hoping that the number and type selected 
just happened to correspond exactly with those of the species or person under discussion.
Thirdly a number of the above are qualitative and will themselves need further 
constants to fit any given case.

As the matter stands it seems to me that there are two ways of proceeding - 
the particular and the universal : - 

a) The particular. Here we must wait until the physiologists by actual experimental 
examination of some animal or person have discovered the particular function 
rules, with full constants, so that, with the aid of our generalised scheme 
we may then deal with that particular animal.

b) The universal. Here we must consider the function rules, not in detail,
but by examination of the generalised scheme so as to work out
further generalised laws governing the nature of the function rules. In 

(33 of 260)

188. 

this way we would discover the whole general principles which must apply to all 
nerve nets, without necessarily being able to apply it in practise to any given 
nerve net.

Again it becomes clear that we need a symbolic or mathematical method 
for handling these things - but I cannot see this latter at all clearly yet.

___________

8.12.30.

By counting a section like a blood count I have arrived at the following 
approximate figures for number of fibres (axons).

No. of axons in corpus callosum. ___ 5-20 x 10^6
No. of axons in one pyramidal tract (direct and crossed) __ 5-20 x 10^4
___________________ posterior column = 1-10 x 10^4
Total ascending fibres in upper spinal cord (both sides) = about 20 x 10^4
_____ descending _______________________________________ = about 20 x 10^4

In these figures it must be understood that the exponential is the only significant 
figure. 

__________

9.12.30.

A paper published by me. (Ref. 181).

___________

9.12.30
Note on nicotine and chronaxy. It is known, from Langly's work (Ref. 182) on 
nicotine that it will block a synapse without affecting the nerve. This latter, it 
should be noticed means that after applying nicotine to a nerve fibre, the 
impulse will still pass through. (We must not draw unjustifiable conclusions).
Now suppose, like the chronaxy merchants, we do not alter the concept

(34 of 260)

189.

of the synapse but insist on interpreting it as a chronaxy mechanism --
how shall we interpret this state of affairs? We would have to assume 
that nicotine raised or lowered the chronaxy of one or both fibres so that 
isochronic conduction could not occur. Now since it does not (ex hypothesis)
influence the synapse, it must therefore affect the chronaxy of the nerve
fibre (axon). But we have already seen that nicotine does not block 
an axon to an impulse - therefore : - the alteration of chronaxy in 
an axon does not block the impulse. This is fundamental for 
it means that an impulse can rise or fall in chronaxy while going 
along an axon (continuous) but cannot rise or fall while passing 
a synapse. The axon, therefore, can act as a sort of lock gate through
which the impulse can pass while its chronaxy is being raised or lowered
to some other level. In this way an impulse can start off with a 
chronaxy of say 10 from some receptor, and can be finally perviated
as an impulse of say 20 going to a muscle of the same chronaxy.

But now I see, like so many of these "great discoveries" that it is 
really obvious quote apart from nicotine, for were this not so one could 
never develop a conditioned reflex between a receptor of one chronaxy, and an 
effector of another chronaxy.

But I can see further. At the synapse a sudden change of chronaxy 
may occur, whereas in the axon a sudden change will be most unlikely.
It is almost certain therefore that the condition which determines whether
an impulse shall pass or not depends upon the gradient of chronaxy 
over distance, i.e. it depends on the slope of the chronaxy gradient. If this

(35 of 260)

190. 

exceeds a given value then conduction will not occur i.e. d(chronaxy) / d(distance) must 
not exceed K chronaxy units per cm, where K is an experimental 
constant. But at the moment I cannot quite see why at the synapse, 
which is probably very thin, there is still permitted a comparatively huge 
1:2 change. We might tentatively assume that the "thickness" of all
synapses is constant (perhaps a monomolecular film of some constant 
material) and that K is very large but still constant. In that case
d(chronaxy) would have a constant value, as has been found (1:2).
Note that latter refers to a geometrical increase, not an arithmetical increase so 
that for the above equation (dc/dd < K ) to hold good we should use 
log c as our unit for measuring chronaxy. But this latter point is not 
essential at the moment.

Note that thick fibre = rapid propagation and short chronaxy (see p. 117).
          fine  fibre = slow  ___________ and long  ________.
		  
The grey matter dendrites are characterised by their exceeding fineness so we 
would expect that the incoming impulse as they reach the dendrites would 
slow down enormoosly and would increase tremendously in chronaxy up to a value 
far beyond the ordinary values. This would allow for the long delay or 
latent period of observed in grey matter, and it would also allow to occur 
that slow irradiation and inhibition which has been observed by 
Pavlov (Ref. 5). Also note that at the same time as this slow worm-like 
business was going on, there might be shot off at points various high speed
impulses to the muscles. 

_____

(36 of 260)

191.

11.12.30. 

Following up the ideas re the measurement of chronaxy outlined on previous 
page, I propose to refine a second measurement of chronaxy thus -

Express the chronaxy in thousandths of a second (?) ; take the natural log 
of this number, thus obtaining a new number. This number I shall call 
the "logachron" of the nerve or muscle. Note that if the chronaxy = 1(?), 
then the logachron = 0, so that we may evidently have a negative 
logachron. This might be avoided if necessary by adding on some arbitrary 
number to the logachron; this it will be noticed is equivalent to measuring 
our chronaxies in some  other unit such as minutes or millionth-seconds.
Since these have no more fundamental importance than thousandth-seconds, it 
is a matter of no fundamental importance whether we add an arbitrary number 
to our logachrons or not. On second thoughts, instead of taking natural 
logs, it will make it simpler if we take logs to the base 2 - then 
any change at a synapse of more than one unit will prevent the impulse 
from passing.

Let c = chronaxy in (?) then logachron = 3.32* log(10)c
                                       = 3.321928 log(10)c
									   
If c is less than 1 (?), then logachron will be negative.
We know thus two basic formulae - (a) l = 3.3 log(10)c  (b) c = 2^l (?)

We may now survey some of the logachrons to see how they look.

p. 117. Frog's logachrons : - skeletal muscle -1.7 to -0.1, ventricle + 1.8,
stomach 4.9 to 6.6., pigment cells 13.3 to 13.8. Curare raises logachron 
by anything up to 6 units.+ Section of nerve in dog raises muscle logachron 
from -1.3 to +4.0 units. (p. 118) Veratine lowers logachron of muscle by 1.0 units.

*3.3 is probably accurate enough for all ordinary work.
+ If chronaxy is raised n times, then logachron has increased by log(10)n/log(10)2 units.

(37 of 260)

192. 

Strychnine lowers nerve logachron by 1 unit. 

p. 127. All skeletal muscles of man have logachrons between -3.6 and -0.5
i.e. a range of 3.1 logachron units. Fall into 3 groups : - 

smallest = -3.6 to -2.6 units
medium   = - 2.3 to 1.5   "
largest  = -1.2 to -0.5   "

p. 129 Logachrons of opposing muscles are different by 1.0 to 1.5 units, except in thigh 
where it is even higher.

p. 129. Logachrons of segments : - 

C - 4,5,6,    =  about -2.8
C - 6, 7      =    "   -2.4
C - 7,8, D.1. =    "   -1.8
                   "   -1.0
				   
i.e. a total range of about 3 units.

p. 130 logachron of vestibular nerve = + 3.7 to + 4.4 units. Largest yet discovered
in human body. Total range as far discovered in human body therefore seems
to be from about -3.6 to + 4.4, a total range of 8.0 units. (There 
seems therefore room for 9 systems to be at work without overlapping).

p. 131. Thousen's disease and (?), logachrons may rise by 7-8 units.

_____

11.12.30.

Note on echo phenomenon. Rizzolo (already quoted) has shown that peripheral 
stimulation alters chronaxy of cortex.

_____

(38 of 260)

193.

13.12.30.

Note on sleep. It has always seemed rather difficult to me that sleep should be 
cortical inhibition, while all the time the cortex is acting vigorously in dream formation.
It has just occurred to me that the whole thing can be explained perfectly well not 
by total inhibition but by a layer of inhibition severing the cortex from the 
periphery. This would then produce inaction since the person is cut off from the 
world (note that the "motor exit" door would also have to be shit, or inhibited)
while the cortex, now isolated, goes on as before, working out its patterns indefinitely.
This layer, of course, may be only one synapse thick in which case the 
layer of inhibition reduces itself to a state of blocking of one layer of synapses 
at the entrance and exist of the cortex. Note that these are just the points 
at which the impulses are concentrated. It is like a "bottle-neck" street and 
traffic. The cortex corresponds to an open plain with a narrow mountain pass 
on one side as entrance and another pass on the other side as exit. Naturally
the passes will be the parts most congested with traffic. Now if we assume 
that virovanophilia holds good and that each cell after receiving an impulse 
reacts so as to stop it from arriving again, then we will see that at the "bottle-necks"
where there are few cells, a cell will pass on the impulse to call "a", then to cell 
"b" and so on, each cell becoming refractory after receiving the impulse until 
finally all are used up. The whole mechanism must now stop and wait 
until the cells have "recovered", i.e. sleep will occur. We can 
see here, that sleep will be connected with the 
presence of the cortex, or more generally,  with the presence of a "wide 
open space." If an animal  has a C.N.S. of the same "physiological"
"width" throughout, there will be no obvious periods of sleep to an outside

(39 of 260)

194. 

observer. Fundamentally, of course, the C.N.S. will "sleep" in small patches or 
one cell at a time, until each patch has "recovered," when the next patch or 
cell will go to sleep.

It should be noted that this idea fits perfectly with Pavlov's experimental 
work (Ref. 5), showing that monotonous stimuli are most effective in causing sleep.
Here we obviously explain this finding, for monotonous stimuli are those which 
keep stimulating the same sense organ and the same central cells over and over 
again, until all the possible routes have been used up, when the impulse will 
no longer pass and inhibition is said to have occurred. Note that this direct 
"synapse-blockage" inhibition only applies to that particular analyser or receptor.
What about the other entrances to the cortex? How do they also become inhibited?
Obviously in some way by the extension of the inhibition. I do not see the details 
clearly but I should imagine that it has something to do with the spread of 
chronaxy alterations - "reprecussion" in Bourguignon's terminology, " irradiation"
in Pavlov's.

Now what of the dream and what of the cortex while it is isolated? Obviously 
the impulses already in the cortex go on working themselves out perhaps 
endlessly. What are these impulses and whence have they come? Obviously again 
they are of two types - those which have been abruptly inhibited or repressed 
and also those impulses which are progressing to conation or action presently 
but which are not yet quite ripe. Freud only admits the first in the dream, 
but Jung, I believe, admits that both are present. The latter type may also be 
divided into worked out patterns which are awaiting the appropriate time 
and place for expression and a second class which consists of patterns which are not 

(40 of 260)

195.

yet worked out, i.e. unsolved patterns. We may therefore give a scheme of 
cortical activities during sleep : - 


Cortical activities        1. Repressed material           (a) completed patterns
                       <                                  
during sleep               2. Non-perviated material   <   (b) incompleted patterns


That these latter (class 2a.) impulses are present in the cortex, and that they 
may be worked out during sleep has been abundantly shown.* Almost certainly 
all problems continue their attempts at solution continuously during day and 
night (i.e. if some problems are worked at and solved during sleep then we 
may say with some certainty that all problems will be worked at during sleep.)
But remember, this does not necessarily mean that they must necessarily 
appear in the manifest content of the dream; it is not yet known whether all 
cortical activities appear in the dream or not. I should think it most probable 
that in the dream there is still a conscious and an unconscious; in fact it is now 
obvious that this is so for we have both manifest and latent contexts in the dream.
We may note that there are two ways in which activity of a pattern may be 
"present" in the dream, i.e. "manifestly" and also by modifying the manifest 
context, or "latently." All activities are not explicitly present in the first, of course,
whether all contribute to it or not is unknown. Note that because unsolved 
problems etc are not found by free association does not necessarily mean that 
they are not present; the technique may not be appropriate. In chemistry 
we do not use the same test for say sodium and calcium, we use two tests 
either of which may be positive or negative without contradicting the other 

*Herrick (Ref. 92) gives one example.

(41 of 260)

196. 

Perhaps later when the theory is more advanced, I may be able to invent, on 
theoretical grounds, a technique for discovering these other activities. At present we 
must not consider Freud's results unassailable; the dream may be a mere 
hotch-potch which gives the unconscious a good start for it to get rid of its 
complexes. Remember that it is possible for me to analyse by free association 
another person's dream as though it were my own.

Rereading the above there are several interesting observations which occur to me.
First - note that as soon as the sensory entrance is blocked, the motor exit must be 
blocked otherwise the person acting according to the cortical impulses without sensory 
guidance to direct him.* This might lead him into walking over a cliff or 
drinking lysol or some other accident. This seems to be the motor path is open 
so the person goes wandering about, attempting more or less to work out their 
cortical pattern (cf. Lady Macbeth). Note that it is only the cortical entrance 
and exit which is blocked normally, so that all the subcortical mechanisms 
will work perfectly well - balancing, the reflexes, etc. (Note sentries who go to 
sleep standing up, probably "spinal" type of mechanisms working normally). It is a 
question for the future how the motor exit shuts at the same time (normally)
as the sensory entrance.

Note that above I have been assuming throughout that inhibition is 
supposed to consist of simple cellular inexcitability (perhaps a chronaxy change).

Note that there remains to be discussed ((?) (?)) why sleep continues 
steadily and the suddenly stops and activity starts.

Note that the depth of sleep (= intensity of sitmulus necessary to break through

*Concept of sensory correction (obviously connected with echo phenomenon).

(42 of 260)

197.

the barrier) has been measured and might gives values for change in 
chronaxy with time after stimulation (assuming synapse blockage to be a 
chronaxy mechanism).

________________


Re the question of what will happen to a unit impulse isolated from 
all "content", I have found, by experience, that this gives no pattern 
but just a simple tetanoid twitch to all muscles, uncontrollable, and not 
understoof at the moment. It just goes clean through to the muscles. The 
person's mind, the ego if you like, can do nothing but merely observes it 
happen and tries hard to find out what it is all about. This suggests 
(a) that a single isolated impulse cannot form a pattern but irradiates 
diffusely and goes straight to action and (b) that the "ego" does not lie along 
this path, otherwise the ego would be "willing" the movement since it 
would receive the impulse and pass it on to the muscles. My own 
introspectinal view of what happens is that the ego is off the main track 
and observes the impulses flash past and then feels a crash as the 
impulses hit the muscles and send back a mass of stimuli from the 
joints and muscles.* This is not unlike the dream where the ego stands as 
it were on one side and watches the patterns change and flicker in 
front of it. But this is getting too deep for me at present.

_______________

Note on hysteria. In this disorder we may find multiple 
personalities. When these others are found and brought to light, usually 
by hypnosis we may note the invariable way in which as soon as one 

*similar to strychnine poisoning 

(43 of 260)

198.

personality appears, all the others are promptly inhibited so that they cannot
appear. Whichever one is up in consciousness inhibits all the others.
This is obviously similar to reciprocal innervation. The resemblance may
mean that each may shed light on the mechanism of the other. This needs 
further development. Also similar to the way in which refleces inhibit one another in the struggle
for the final common path.

14.12.30.

Note on the derivation of the instincts from the environment. It has occurred
to me that since the stimuli are derived from outside the C.N.S. it may be 
possible that the instincts are also derived from the environment. I have 
already considered the possibility that the sex instinct may be derived from 
the nerves from the seminal vesicles. What of the "herd" instinct? 
It seems to me to be quite clear that this may be caused by the people (outisde)
themselves. It is usually admitted that they may modify the manifestations 
or tpe of the instinct. They are also the cause of the instinct. If we admit 
this we must almost admit that all the environment causes appropriate 
instincts to arise. Hence we will find as many instincts as there are "parts"
to the environment - which is obviously infinite in possibilities. The herd 
instinct will stand out clearly simply because people stand out clearly in 
the envirnment as being stimuli of high importance. The other "parts" of the 
environment are not so clearly defined, so the instincts appropriate to them 
are also not so clearly defined. This explains beautifully why all these 
lists of instincts one sees in books are so varied - simply because they are 
attemps to "partition" the environment into rigid and wateright compartments;
this obviously cannot be done. The idea that the instincts come from

(44 of 260)

199.

the environment suggests even more strongly the completely undifferentiated 
nature of the original nervous system at birth, for the instincts are 
picked up out of the environment. (yes, but what about animal 
habits, birds building nests etc?).

______________

16.12.30.

I can foresee one diffculty about fitting this theory to psychopathology 
in general, which is that the disorders of function possible will almost 
certainly form an endless and continuous transition without being split 
into sharp groups. I notice however that I may be able to avoid this, or 
rather, to make it reasonable by dealing with the subject statistically. At 
certain points in the development of the disorder, the direction taken may, 
lacking further knowledge, depend on chance, eg. it may depend upon whether 
two adjacent neurons happen to be at the same logachron or not. If this is 
dealt with statistically, we may calculate a distribution, and we may find 
that the distribution, although continuous, is bimodal, thus predicting two 
clinical types with many or few cases occurring between to connect them.

______________

Note on the herd instinct and dementia praecox. It has occurred to me that 
the vast number of social orders and commands can really be disobeyed with a 
fundamental impurity. If one imagines a person about to disobey one of the vast 
number of unwritten laws, society says in a loud and commanding voice : - 
"Thou shalt not or I will......" But it's all bluff. Society cannot enforce 
its decrees in any fundamental way except in the rare case of a man sentenced 
to a flogging. Obviously the power of society depends on the fact that its 

(45 of 260)

200. 

bluff is not called. I think this power must ultimately rest on actual 
physical punishment inflicted during childhood. This 
memory of pain will keep the child and later the the adult continually on the 
qui vive ready at any instant to react with considerable activity to avoid the 
possibility of future punishment. In this way it will act as a never ending 
source of activity since a situation or stimulus which might be ignored 
is no longer dealt with in that way but is reacted to by considerable activity 
aimed at avoiding the remote suggestion of punishment which is implies.
Now suppose the child is never punished, but is merely threatened from the beginning.
Obviously the ordinary stimuli to action which will have no effect, for it is the 
possibility of actual pain which drives us to action. Such a child will be veyr 
quiet and inactive and may later develop almost complete inactivity - 
i.e. he will become a wild dementia praecox. Note that physical 
punishment for a crime is a great to extraversion. This however does
not quite explain the complexes in dem. praecox, nor does it explain why 
he should become so inactive as to refuse food. No, D.P. is more a 
disorder than a simple reaction to the environment.

______________

18.12.30.

The principle of virovanophilia (which I am now convinced is the key to the 
C.N.S.) seems to be violated by the casual way in which a person will 
submit to myriads of simuli as in walking half a mile in order to stop a 
few stimuli, such as the desire for a glass of beer. Many examples of this 
occur to me, but in all we have the same fundamental phenomenon - that 
a person will perform a reaction involving myriads of stimuli of less "value"

(46 of 260)

201. 

or "meaning" in order to quieten a few stimuli of high "value" or 
"meaning." Thus the principle of virovanophilia seems to be violated.
On closer examination, however, we find that it is not really provided 
that we split the C.N.S. into a number of levels. The explanation 
is that the myriads of indifferent stimuli which come in, only a few
reach the level which has ordered the movement or reaction. Now we  
see the explanation of the existance of levels in the C.N.S. - each 
level completely dominates those below it (or perhaps, the one below it)
and was it solely to suit its own purposes. If the upper level 
has to deal with the myriads of stimuli, then it won't do the reaction and 
the small stimuli remains unanswered (inexpert pianist who has to 
struggle consciously with the notes refuses to play to the company), but 
if the upper level never sees the myriads of stimuli aroused, then in 
answer to the few stimuli it will order the reaction and see it carried 
out, completely indifferent to the "suffering" it causes in the lower level
(the expert pianist who plays without conscious thought consents to play 
for the company). Now we see the vast importance of levels and also 
why they exist - it is that the more levels there are above one another,
the more does the system become capable of taking a long-sighted view 
of the situation - it can work for larger results and need not bother 
how much is "sacrificed" is a lower level to achieve the result.
A system without levels would have to work all the time in strict 
conformity with the immediate sensory environment. Note that the 
postulate of the "equivalence of levels" is perfectly satisfied here, for each

(47 of 260)

202. 

level works on exactly the same principle, namely that of virovanophilia.
Note that the latter is only time in any one level, it does not hold if one 
attempts to add together two levels and treat them as one. We may 
therefore picture the C.N.S. as a "hierarchy of levels." 
Stimuli enter and are transferred higher and higher until 
at last a level is reached which is capable of dealing with it. It 
then stimulates this leve which reacts by "ordering" the next lowest 
level to carry out some reaction. This is passed down and down,
each level knowing less and less of the aim of the whole thing but each 
workingout out the plan in finer and finer detail until it is put into execution.
It should be noted that pain goes up to all levels, hence its prepotency 
as a stimulus to action. Note that the higher layers are not at all in 
contact with reality, they are only in contact with the (?) of the next layer
down, and also, that what the top layers "know" is entirely different
from what the lower layers "know" e.g. the cortex only knows movements,
it knows nothing of muscles. It decides on movements - it is for the 
lower layers to turn this into terms of muscles.

This explains the ceaseless restless activity of the cerebrate animal as 
compared with the torpor of the decerebrate and especially of the spinal 
animal. The higher levels, being removed from the lower levels, can 
cause the latter to undergo endless activities in order that the upper level 
may be free from some trivial but annoying stimulus, i.e. the animal
will, or may, indulge in a long series of reactions in order to be rid of
some small stimulus. On the other hand the spinal animal cannot do

(48 of 260)

203. 

cannot do this for having perhaps only one level, it is bound by 
virovanophilia to count the stimuli received in a reaction against stimuli 
removed, and if the gain in "peace and quiet" is negative, then it cannot 
and will not react. This gives us at once a clue to the solution 
of the problem of "values" in stimuli. To a simple 
nerve-net without levels, all stimuli will be of equal value, wheeas to 
an animal with many levels, stimuli will assume as many values as 
there are levles to be ascended by the stimulus. COnsider a spinal 
man brought into a room with a 5 pound note on the table. To him, all 
stimuli are of equal value and his whole aim will be to reduce the 
grand total to the smallest possible sum. To him the notal will 
be a piece of white paper, stimulating solely because it is white it 
is exciting the rods and cones in the retina. To the man with many levels,
however, the stimuli from the white paper will not be dealt with 
by the lower levels but will be passed up and up until it reaches the 
top layer where it will obviously be a stimulus of high value in the 
determination of subsequent behavior. The "weight" of an 
impulse (using "weight" statistically where we speak of "(?)" observations 
according to their value), the "weight" of a simple nervous impulse will 
therefore be measured by the number of levels traversed before it 
is integrated and passed into action. Pain is an impulse of high 
weight since it always goes up to the top. Sex may have its high weight 
in determining our behavior because it may go always up to the top 
layer. Note that in walking one has to react to certain stimuli caused

(49 of 260)

204. 

by gravitation, joing movements and muscle movements. The laws regulating 
the interradiations of these stimuli are simple (comparatively) and will therefore 
be dealt with by lower layers. These things will therefore have 
small weight in influencing behavior. Note, with regard to the relative 
weights of sex and movement, that Isaac worked seven years for Rebecca 
(I believe). (Ref. 183) Obviously the sec stimuli were of vastly higher weight 
than the movement and work stimuli. This example shows well how the 
presence of levels, with the upper level independant of the virovanophilia 
of the lower, enables the organism to take a long sighted view of the 
situation.

This principle of levels and virovanophilia is beginning to get into deeper
water. Note for instance that when the upper level says to the lower 
level "walk" it must, I think, on the principle of virovanophilia,
subject the lower level to a torrent of stimuli sufficient to force 
the lower level to perform its reactions in spite of the masses of 
stimuli received from below tending to inhibit the lower level 
and to stop it. The donkey (the lower level) does not want to climb the 
hill for it will thereby receive impressions of fatique, so if its Master
(the upper level) wants it to go up he must subject it to a shower of 
blows so that the donkey will go up the hill and accept fatique as the 
lesser of two evils. We may note, from 
the anatomical point of view that as we ascend the C.N.S. the masses 
of grey matter get layer and layer (anterior horns, corpora straita, 
cortex). This may be because the higher levels have more complex

(50 of 260)

205. 

patterns to handle, but also because they have to be large enough 
to be able to beat the lower levels into subjection (beating them 
by showers of impulses). We may note in passing that at times it 
may not be able to do it; the upper layer may not be strong 
enough or it may be cut off from the lower levels. This will 
lead to various pathological disturbances of function which I 
will investigate later. We may now generalise a little further
by realising that when layers exist, each layer has a 
double environment (using the word in a more general sense) i.e.
a lower and an upper, and it must work out its reactions 
so that the sum of all impulses from the environments may 
be a minimum. Note that the impulses, in one layer, are all of 
equal weight so it merely has to reckon the total number 
involved.

____________

19.12.30.

The last few days I have come to the conclusion that virovanophilia 
is the long looked for clue and the nervous system. I was much disturbed 
by the apparent contradiction on p. 200. but since the concept of levels 
has completely removed it I now feel sure that I have got the fundamental 
principle. What it needs now is years of study and application 
to fit it to all the masses of detailed knowledge which is possessed.

____________

19.12.30.

If dreams occur in the cortex, and if all levels are equivalent, 
why should not similar phenomena occur at lower levles? How

(51 of 260) 

206.

would such phenomena show themselves clinically? I cannot answer 
this at the moment.

____________

19.12.30. 

I should note here a possibility I have had in my mind 
for some time, namely that the pattern may shift over the cortex 
only in one layer with the other layers above and below it modifying
it as it passes underneath. This would give both a certain fluidity to 
cortical function and also a certain amount of permanent localisation.
Further it must always be remembered that the cortex microscopically is 
layered with different types of cells and fibres. This must be explained sooner
or later.

__________

19.12.30.

Note the obvious similarity between virovanophilia and von Uexkull's idea 
of the annihilations of indications as the fundamental activity of the C.N.S.

_________

19.12.30.

Note that virovanophilia may explain the learning of binocular vision,
since when the two fields of vision correspond on the visual cortices, the resulting stimulation may 
be less than when the animal suffers from diplopia.

________

21.12.30.

I am coming rather to the opinion that the reactions of the C.N.S. down through the 
postural reflexes right down to the simple reflexes are all learned from the envrionment.
If that is so, we notice at one that the simple reflexes are dealt with the 
spinal cord, the postural reflexes in the mid brain, and the highest reactions in the 
cortex. we see at once that the simplest and most constant reactions are dealt with 


(52 of 260)

207. 

much closer to the periphery than the higher and more complicated. We will therefore 
elevate this well established fact to be the nauk of a princple which we may 
describe by saying that the path from receptor to effector is always of 
the shortest possible length, understanding always the more complex the 
environment, the further back will the seat of the reaction be situated.
We will call this the postulate of geodelic path. The most important 
point to settle here is - how is this achieved? Obviously, by the postulate of 
bilal irradiation, the impulses will go through all paths, but if simple, the longer 
will fade out that be used. But how? I do not quite see this at the moment. 
Note than an important point which first needs clearing up is the question of the 
"simplicity" of stimuli, what it means, and how it might be measured objectively.
Note also that we seem here to have an example of "memory" on a "path" system, an 
idea on which I have poured scorn (paper to be submitted for publication).

__________

21.12.30.

Re the footnote to p. 181, note that the two types of memory are tather different;
the (?), however unable to walk, nevertheless still remembers perfectly how 
he used to swing along on the route (?) in the territorials - he has a perfectly 
clear memory of the situation as it appeared to him, but he cannot put his 
memory into practise. There are therefore two types of memory - static and dynamic,
in the static memory he merely recalls to mind a situation past in time, in the dynamic 
however, he is asked to repeat the same thing in action.

__________

21.12.30.

Re dementia praecox, I cannot quite make up my mind whether the patient 
is really reacting normally to an abnormal situation, whether something

(53 of 260)

208.

really has gone wrong with the works outing to the strain imposed on them.

_________

22.12.30.

On p. 149 there is a query about the Purkinje cells. On thinking it over, it 
seems to me that the difference between this type of union of two cells and the 
union by the single synapse shows two possibilities : -

(a) It may be a timing arrangement so that the impulse may 
pass down the second cell axon sooner or later according to whether it 
has taken a short or long path.

(b) If more than one synapse passes the impulse, then the second cell will 
receive a shower of impulses - this will of course mean that the 
two cells have produced an amplifying effect, and if the cell 
can close a variable number of synapses, then the simplification will 
be variable.

In either case we can see at once that such a mechanism is sure to be 
concerned with muscle action and movement.

Since it is certain that an impulse can divide among many branches and thus 
increase in number, we may assume for the present that (b) is correct since there is 
at the moment no reason to suppose that the impulses will not travel along to each 
synapse.

________

22.12.30.

Reciprocal innervation and virovanophilia. The fact that reciprocal 
innervation much exist can be shown by deduction from virovanophilia, thus : - 

Assume that the leg has to be moved on the thigh through angle (?). The 
principle of virovanophilia says that the muscle actions will be so arranged that

(54 of 260)

209.

the stimuli returning as echo impulses will be a minumum. On working out the 
stimuli we find that stimuli received are from three sources : -

(a) Stimuli from joint. Number = f(?) = (ex-hypothesis) a constant
(b) Stimuli from agonist (sense organs in muscles)

Numbers = f(distance moved(1) tension(1)) = f((?)(1) tension(1)) = f(tension(1))

(c) Stimuli from antagonist   number = f(distance moved(2) tension(2)) = f(tension(2))

Therefore total stimuli = f(tension(1), tension(2)).

Now tension(2) merely impedes tension(1) and makes tension(1) greater in order 
to move the limb through (?), therefore stimuli received will be terminal if 
tension(2) is minimal, i.e. according to virovanophilia, the antagonist will 
relax (=reciprocal innervation).

Note that the above proof rests on the assumption that the stimuli 
per second sent up by a muscle sense organ and increases with the tension. This 
I believe, has been shown by Adrian (Ref. unknown).

__________

22.12.30.

While trying to work out impulse paths in a nerve net on a chronaxy 
basis it has occurred to me that a new concept may be used, perhaps with 
advantage. 

Take a nerve net, measure the chronaxies (or better, logachrons) at 
every point. At each point erect an ordinate of length to represent the chronaxy 
(or logachron) value at that point. Join the tops of these ordinates in the same 
way as the original nerve net. We will now have a waby and irregular 
piece of work hanging over the nerve net, looking like a bent and buckled 
piece of old wire netting. This I propose to call a "chronaxy-net." I am not 

(55 of 260)

210.

calling it a "chronaxy surface" since the latter suggests a continuum, which it 
definitely is not. When we deal with small pieces of it, it is a net, 
although in dealing with large patches in a large way, of course, it will 
be practically a surface. This concept involves nothing whatever new since it 
is merely a simple way of graphing the distribution of chronaxies over the 
nerve-net. We will notice at once, without going a step further, that 
this arrangement will form some sort of pattern - a "chronaxy-pattern."
This, it should be noted, is entirely different fromy my previous "pattern" or 
"ripple" theory which dealt with a pattern of impulses. We will therefore 
split our patterns into two - (a) a "chronaxy-pattern" which is more or less 
static but which may be affected by an always-mobile "impulse-pattern"
which moves over it.

To hypothesise a little we may notice that the chronaxy-pattern and the 
impulse pattern represent two primary degrees of freedom since the impulse - 
pattern corresponds to the present environment while the chronaxy-pattern may 
be said to represent experience and memory.

__________

22.12.30.

Re the "essential light" of the retina, Freud (Ref. 30. p. 26) quotes Ladd
(ref. 184) who, by practise, roused himself, without opening his eyes, 2 to 5 minutes after 
falling asleep, when he compared the "essential light" in the retina with the still 
"visible" dream picture. "He assures us that an intimate relation between the two can 
always be recognized, in the sense that the luminous dots and lines of the spontaneous 
light of the retina produced, so to speak, the skeletal outline or scheme for the psyhically
perceived dream figures."

__________

(56 of 260)

211. 

Note on higher reflexes. It has occurred to me that the defence movement mode 
by an individual when a blow is threatened, usually bringing up the arms to ward off the 
blow, may be considered to be a reflex, but a reflex of a very high type, higher than 
the grasp reflex. It needs standaising and reducing to a form where it can be measured,
but when that is done it should be of value it is a reflex obviously involving high 
cortex, probably the frontal cortex. This, as a "higher reflex", has analogies with the 
"audito-motor" reflex (I believe that is its name).

_________

27.12.30.

While driving to Leavesden to sleep, it occurred to me that in driving the car 
I was subjecting myself to myriads of visual, auditory, motor etc stimuli (about an hour's
continuous stimulation) in order to be free from a free few stimuli which were driving 
me to sleep. Then it occurred to me that the vast number were scarcely conscious, and 
that the less conscious they were, the more easily would I respond to a stimulus by 
driving the car. This lends at once to the concept of levels.

Now driving back that night it seemed to me that the whole group of 
"motor-car driving" reactions which I have learnt seems to be very 
similar to a "complex." The affect of the complex is not particularly intricable here 
but that may be because affect probably appears only when repression occurs. The 
other difference is that instead of a "constellation of ideas" we have a "constellation 
of motor reactions." Since the identity of the "motor car driving" reactions and a complex
is not certain in my mind I must be careful.The first point is to decide 
whether the old (introspectional) concept of an "idea" may be considered equivalent 
to a motor reaction. Stout (Ref. 87) defines an ideas as "a significant 
mental image. It thus has two components, the image and its meaning."

(57 of 260)

212.

This of course, is hopeless. (The old introspectional psychology will probably
be the last thing to be explained since it deals with facts so hopelessly 
intricate and remote form the essentials.)

There is another analogy which we may apply to both reaction-groups
and that is, that at the same level many different reactions and reaction-
-groups may exist side by side, i.e. motor car driving reactions, walking
reactions, skipping reactions, dancing reactions, may existside by side in 
peace and harmony, each one appearing in behavior at the appropriate time.
We may notice the dancer and the violinist, each of whom has stored within 
him perhaps dozens, perhaps hundreds of different dances or tunes, but 
each dance or tune-reaction appears by itself at the appropriate times, all 
the other dances or tunes being temporarily inhibited. Now all the different 
dances or tunes are so similar in their general appearance that we must 
obviously conclude that they all occupy the same level (in the sense of 
"height"). I have previously defined a level as a system within which 
virovanophilia holds completely. I now need a new word to express different 
reactions lying side by side, so to speak.

It seems to me, trying to peer into the darkness of the CNS. That we have 
a succession of levels one above the other, which each levle is split into a 
number of parts - "patches" I will call them* - which represent or produce 
different reactions and that the patches fight amongst one another either to gain 
expression, or more likely to avoid stimulation (because of virovanophilia).
Stimuli coming in are passed up and up until they reach a level capable of 
dealing with the intricacy of the stimuli. This in some way disturbs the patches

*Because the level with its "patches" is like a patch work quilt, in a way.

(58 of 260)

213.

and a vigorous fight now takes place. One of the patches (functional, not 
necessarily anatomical, remember) finishes up by coming out fully while the 
others are all inhibited. 

Note with regard to the "motor car driving" reaction that if this is homologous 
with a complex, then there is a vast difference between its usefulness to me and the 
"usefulness" of a complex. The difference almost certainly lies in the "balance 
of power" involved. In the reaction, it is completely dominated and under 
control, whereas a complex, if obstreperous is too near the power of the rest 
of the C.N.S. and is poorly dominated.

It occurs to me now that in an anatomical unit like the cortex, various levels
may exist intermingled anatomically but separated functionally. The unconcious 
mind probably represents levels below that of the top one which is consciousness.
We may now postulate that "patches at different levels do not intermingled."
Patches at the same level are said (by me) to be "iso-ordinal," while 
those at different levels are called "hetero-ordinal." We will therefore call this 
the postulate of "iso-ordinal integration" meaning that iso-ordinal patches mix 
and integrate, whereas hetero-ordinal patches merely dominate or are dominated.
We have noted previously that patches on a higher level dominate those on a 
lower (independently of virovanophilia) so we will call this the postulate of 
"superordinal dominance." Note that this later is not an essential feature 
of the C.N.S., but depends on the strength of the superordinal patch; should 
this latter be weak, then the dominance will fail.

To return now to the problem of complexes and their treatment by analysis,
we may assume that the purpose of the analysis is to extend the 

(59 of 260)

214.

conscious level down to include the rebellious element. Since this probably 
all takes place in the cortex we need not consider whether the 
complex moves up or conciousness goes down; they are lying side by
side and then they join. Immediately this has occurred, iso-ordinal 
integration starts to occur and progresses steadily to a more satisfactory 
condition. On the other hand, as long as the ocmplex is on a lower level 
this cannot occur. In the latter state, should dominance be complete, all 
will be well, as far as results are concerned, but if the dominance is weak, 
then there will be conflict and trouble.

_____________

27.12.30.

Note on the diagram of page 51. (q.v.). We saw there that, under certain 
conditions, the stimulus would tend to go through in turn to all the effectors,
and that, when finished it would go again to the first and so on ad infinitum.*

This idea may not be without significance in the complexes, 
for if one patch lies idle for a long time it will, according to the above
scheme, tend hard to be activated, chiefly because the other patches will all tend 
to become highly resistant to excitation. This idea, in a way, explains why,
in psychoanalysis, the patient tends to get deeper and deeper, simply because he 
is free from all those stimuli which usually activate other patches, and therefore 
inhibit his complexes. Under analysis however he is subjected to the 
stimulus of the analyst, who very soon loses his inhibitory properties when the 
subject finds that the analyst does not criticise (i.e. when the subject finds that 
the echo impulses are favorable, or more generally when the echo impulses do not cause inhibition
of the complex). Under these conditions, when the echo impulses do not inhibit


*serial distribution of impulses.

(60 of 260)

216. 

the patch, all stimuli will go to its activation of the patch or patches which 
will tend to come out more strongly (into motor speech) the longer it is since 
they were last activated. We now see more clearly the part that 
speech plays in analysis, firstly so that the patient will find that the 
analyst or echo impulses are favorable (on second thoughts this appears 
trivial) and secondly and most important, in order to provide a motor 
exit for the stimuli which are coming in. Speech in the latter is not 
necessary since I have found personally that writing one's thoughts freely 
is just as effective. Since merely thinking about the things (whatever that 
may be) is not so effective, we may assume temporarily that 
the fact that the patches are being 
perviated by stimuli is a matter of high importance in the interrelations 
of the patches. The analyst is, I think, almost certainly now essential.
The essential point about psychoanalysis is that nothingn sshall inhibit the 
"repressed" patch from becoming activated. What happens when a person tries 
analysis (with or without analyst) and fails? Obviously the produced material
(speech or writing) itself acts as a stimulus and may promptly reinhibit the 
whole patch. In such a case we, from the point of view of treatment, 
we must either weaken the rest of the cortex so that the echo impulses do 
not cause such a commotion, i.e. by telling the person that sex etc is 
nothing to be ashamed of (this is often done clinically) or that other method is 
to activate and perviate the repressed patched with the rest of the cortex 
in a obeyance in some way. This last method, although not leading to 
iso-ordinal integration will nevertheless "ease the tension" in the patch so that

(61 of 260)

216.

it will remain prescient for some time, a method which we might 
call "periodic drainage."

This latter may explain those cases which we see clinically when 
a person of strict and puritaical upbringing bursts forth into the most 
disgraceful of debauches (either direct or a little symbolically) and then 
recovers to exactly the same state as before. In such cases coprolagnia,
urolognia, etc are prominently displayed but after this debauch the patient 
recovers completely and remains totally unaffected by this display - obviously 
periodic drainage has occurred, without iso-ordinal integration having 
ocurred. Naturallly such attacks will be recurrent, usually with previously 
symptoms as the "tension" ruses in the repressed patch. From the preceeding 
networks one would obviously expect that such cases would be impossible
to analyse and I believe most analysis would, from clinical experience, 
think twice before attempting to analyse such a case.

______________

27.12.30.

Since reciprocal innervation depends on virovanophilia, we may deduce 
that if two reactions exist such that reciprocal innervation holds between them
then they must be iso-ordinal.

______________

Note on the application of virovanophilia to conciousness, complexes,
imagination, introspection, speech, etc and all other high level activities. It has 
just occurred to me how I must proceed. (a) I must apply virovanophilia to the 
lowest level phenomena, (reflexes etc) and by dealing with these must 
deduce, directly from virocanophilia, certain function rules regarding levels

(62 of 260)

217.

patches, integrations etc so as to arrive at certain generalised principles 
applicable to all levels, patches etc. (b) I must then show that something in the 
lowest level is homologous with something in the higher levels. I will then 
be able to apply the corresponding principle to the upper level phenomena 
i.e. by applying virovanophilia in the lowest level (tracing it out from cell to 
cell, i.e. a cellular virovanophilia) I may work out e.g. what happens to two 
iso-ordinal patches which are opposed; if I then show that a complex is a patch,
I can then apply the same principle to the complexes and so on. But it will all boil 
down ultimately to cellular virovanophilia. We shall then have the whole thing 
complete from cellular reactions to the highest of psychology.

______________

27.12.30.

For a perfect clinical description of the inhibitable type of Pavlovian man, 
see Stephen Leacock (ref. 185).

_____________

29.12.30.

In the case of any given impulse passing up a nerve fibre, we cannot say where it 
will go until we know what all the other impulses are doing. (An isolated impulse has been 
dealth with). At once we see that each impulse as it passes along nerve fibre 
influences simultaneously the course of other impulses travelling along other fibres. i.e.

(hand-drawn diagram)

an impulse going along AA^1 is influenced by whether or not an impulse is going along 
BB^1. This is the old idea that a bunch of stimuli cannot be dealth with as 
though it consisted of independant impulses. I will call this the postulate

(63 of 260)

218.

a principle of the mutual influence of impulses. Obviously we may add that 
the intensity of the natural influence will be (more or less) intensely proportional 
to the "distance" (measured in cms or in number of axons, or synapses) between the 
impulses.

Further details of this we wanted for this will provide us with important 
properties of patterns and chronaxy nets etc.

____________

29.12.30.

I find on reading about him that this theory of virovanophilia is nothing 
but Schlopenhauer's philosophy redressed in more scientific terms with elaboration.
I must read him (Ref. 186).

Von Hartman (famous German philospher) also concludes that "the greater part of the will perceives 
the inevitable misery of existance, and finally man will seek the peace of non-
existance." (Ref. 187).


____________

29.12.30.

I find there are two patients in Leavesden who sleep with their eyes open : -
William Carter, no. 14694 and Walter Butler no. 15574. On testing out the former while 
asleep I found : - 

(a) Only one eye was open (it is always only the right eye.)

(64 of 260)

219. 

(b) the pupil was contracted down (with the plasis probably equals sympathetic 
non-function).

(c) the pupil reacted instantly and fully to light although the patient did not 
wake.

(d) On shining the light in, slow wandering movements occurred like those 
of the congenitally fluid. The other eye under its lid did not seem 
to move but I am not sure.

Nearly all results are of some importance, especially (e) which is 
fundamental forit puts the layer of inhibition back in the cortex at once.

_____________

29.12.30.

Note on the weighting of stimuli. Observe the high weight of visual 
sitmuli - this fits with the fact that in the visual tract only the simplest 
mechanisms can be performed before it reaches the cortex, consequently practically
everything will be, and is, referred to the cortex. But note again that different 
objects in the field of vision have different "weights", so that we must suppose that 
there are sub conscious levels in the cortex. Note that owing to the wide projection 
of the macular in the cortex, objects in this part of the field will automatically have 
more "weight" than at the periphery.

____________

30.12.30.

I have already (some way back) concluded that a stopped stimulus lowers 
resistance of synapse. Here I am using "stopped" in the sense of a succession 
of stimuli which suddenly ceases. Now since summaiton occurs, and if 
the mechanism is a chronaxy mechanism, then we can deice at once, from 
the phenomenon of summation, that a blocked impulse brings the chronaxies

(65 of 260)

220. 

closer. It may do this by affecting its own cell, or the other (very unlikely) or 
both (unlikely). From Bourguignon's repercussion, and from the principle of the 
mutual influence of impulses we have already seen that impulses modify chronaxy,
and chronaxy in one cell influences chronaxy in another. We see therefore 
that (on the principle of virovanophilia) a "passed" impulse should seperate 
the chronaxies, while a "blocked" impulse should bring them together. We need 
not worry at the moment which one changes, or how they change.

_____________

2.1.31

It has just occured to me that my postulates of total irradiation and of 
adaptation by inhibition are really the same, for in each case we start with 
a broad activiation, which differentiates and adapts by closing down unwanted 
"paths."

_____________

2.1.31.

I am rereading Bainbridge and Menzies (Ref. 2) in order to see if I can 
crystallise some of my ideas out.

I do not believe in the least in the "law of forward direction." I refuse to 
believe that all the synapses of the C.N.S. are values.Eevery single one would 
have to be set correctly for correct functioning to occur. It seems to rest on the 
negative effect of stimulating the cut central end of an anterior root. It is obviously 
open to other interpretations.

p. 44. "It has been shown in certain invertebrates that reflex action can still 
take place for a short time when the cells associated with the fibres forming the 
reflex are have been destroyed." (therefore probably a synapse function).

p. 69. as the strength of the stimulus is increased, so the reflex time is shortened.

(66 of 260)

221. 

What does it mean, this "strength of stimulus" (hardness of pressure of pin, intensely 
of induced current)? I see the answer clearly. It is usually assumed, more 
or less implicitly that because there is one stimulus, there will be one impulse.
i.e. (same ref.) p. 68 "A stimulus applied to a receptor sets up an impulse....."
Note the singular. This is definitely false. A stimulus applied starts 
off the receptor sending off impulses like starting a (?) or better, 
pressing the button of an electric bell - the impulses keep travelling as 
long as the bell is pressed. We recognise therefore that stimuli very 
in duration. It also varies in quality (heat, pressure, light etc). How then 
does it vary in intensity. Obviously because the impulses go up more 
frequently (impulses/sec). Here we see the importance of the relative 
refractory period. If the receptor jumped from zeo excitability straight 
to normal, there could be no grading of the intensity of stimuli.

(hand-drawn graph)

As it is, the rise is gradual (see Ref. 17)

(hand-drawn graph)

so that a strong stimulus will evoke a response at A whereas a weaker one will

(67 of 260)

have to wait until the excitability has risen to B before it can discharge 
the next impulse. We will therefore show the change of excitability with time 
under(A) weak stimulus and (B) strong stimulus.

(hand-drawn graph)

(A) weak stimulus

(hand-drawn graph)

(B) strong stimulus.

One should note that a stimulus also has extensity (form properties of a stimulus 
= quality, extensity, intensity, and duration*). We may note that this observation,
that impulses go as "bursts of machine gun fire" allows us to grade our stimuli 
perfectly without coming into conflict with the "all or none" law. This latter 
was a stumbling block. I have long been certain that intensity came in some
where. we have now made a start by recognising that the intensity of 
a stimulus may be measured menologically by counting the number of 
impulses per second per receptor which it gives rise to. Note how time, already 
present in chronaxy, again comes into the C.N.S.

p. 69. "If the strength of the stimulus necessary to elicit a particular reflex be 

*Stout (Ref. 87) also agrees with the four "degrees of freedom" of a stimulus (he calls it a sensation).

(68 of 260)

223. 

determined, and the experiment is repeated with a stronger stimulus, (1) there 
may be an increase in the strength of the original response, and (2) additional muscles 
may be thrown into contraction (irradiation)"  This distinction is quite illogical 
and invalid - there is irradiation in the first just as in the second except that 
the impulse irradiate to extra fibres instead of to extra muscles. We 
may therefore draw the general conclusion that the "width" of spread of a 
burst of impulses varies proportionately with the frequency with which 
they arrive. Now there is no anatomical break between the receptor and 
the "additional muscles," the stoppage is therefore a synapse stoppage.
We have already seen (p. 219) that an impulse stopped at a synapse 
lowers resistance (using that word instead of chronaxy difference). Now we see
that if we have two neurones at chronaxies (better logachrons) a and b, (a does not equal b)
and that if the difference a~b - d is lessened by an impulse and then 
starts to drift back to its old value, we will have, for a single stopped 
impulse : -

(hand-drawn graph)

Note that if a second impulse had arrived before P, i.e. while d was below one 
(logachron) unit, then it would have got through. Now if we imagine the 
burst of impulses coming in and meeting a fan of nerves, with the central

(69 of 260)

224. 

neuron having a chronaxy like its own, while the chronaxies get more and more 
difficult as one passes away.

(hand-drawn diagram)

Then, if the stimulus is of low intensity, the impulses will be few per second 
and the impulses will go one by one down the "central" path. The "stopped"
impulses will lower d at the other synapses, but d will be up again 
before the next impulse comes. (Note that d is practically a measure of the 
resistance of a synapse, with threshold = 1 unit.)
We must note here that if d is sufficiently high, evan at its maximum 
drop, it may no drop to 1 unit. If d is fairly large, it may just 
remain below 1 unite for a very short time, while if d is only just above 
1 unit then it will remain below 1 unit for quite a time.

(three hand-drawn graphs)

p = time the synapse is 'open.' Now we see clearly, although I cannot prove it 
at the moment, that the more frequently the impulse arrive, the more chance

(70 of 260)

225. 

will they have of catching the synapse in the interval p. the "width" of the 
irradiation (considering at first one impulse followed up by a second) will 
depend on how quickly impulse 2 follows impulse 1, and also on the 
size of the "resting" d. If d is graduated as suggested, then the
"width" of the irradiation is satisfactorily explained.

But there are actually further complications for it, accoridng to virovanophilia
the synapse resistances go up after passing the impulse, then we get 
further complications.

For the moment we will note that intensity is impulse frequency.

We may also note that in an ordinary muscular contraction, only a few fibres 
are contracting at any given moment, and that the fibres contracting are continuously 
changing. This is strong evidence for virovanophilia for it is exactly what one would
expect. This simple fact shows clearly that synapse resistance (or chronaxy difference)
must rise after the passage of an impulse, and probably falls steadily until it is 
stimulated again, always remembering that it is influenced by cells around it.
But this latter, the repercussion of Bourguignon also boils down to the same thing
for the two neurons as they lie side by side (picture p. 217) are firing impulses 
at one another all the time by their connecting neurons and dendrons, hence, since 
stopped stimuli lower resistance, the chronaxies must approach.

___________________

3.1.31.

Note how the above idea of a burst of impulses (especially last paragraph) fits well with 
the ideas about the Purkinje cells discussed on p. 208.

___________________

3.1.31.

On looking again at the figures on p. 222, we note at once how like they are 

(71 of 260)

226. 

to the vibrations of a musical note. The strong stimulus corresponds to a high note 
while the weak stimulus corresponds to a low note. This suggests that my idea 
of dealing with the C.N.S. as a set of resonators may not be entirely false. We 
would not expect the C.N.S. to behave completely like a musical instrument but 
nevertheless, it may be possible to deal with it, artificially, as a set of resonators 
with certain modified properties.

__________________

3.1.30.

It is a perfect example of the irony of things that just when I am publishing 
an article criticising the path or framework idea, I am coming to the conclusion 
that some sort of localisation in neurons is necessary!

__________________

4.1.30.

My old postulate that psychic energy lends to decrease is the same idea as v. Uexkull's 
(?) of indications.

_________________

4.1.30.

p. 225, last paragraph. We have seen that virovanophilia will ensure that when a series
or burst of impulses arrives at a group of neurons which are all equivalent, then the impulse
will be distributed to each in turn and when all are used it will start at the beginning 
again and so on indefinitely. I shall, in future, describe this as a "serial"
distribution of the impulses to the gorup. Or I shall say that the impulses will be 
distributed "serially."

________________

4.1.30.

Consider the "defence" reflex as an example of a higher reflex. The raising of the arms
to war off a blow is the obvious thing to do and is always a pretty adequate response 
to the stimulus (visual). We can see now that there is no essential difference between the

(72 of 260)

227. 

reflexes and most complicated behaviour - it all depends on the environment. The
environment, we may consider, offers situations of all grades of complexity.
Certain situations or stimuli are continuously revurring and are each 
time adequately answered by a simple and unvarying reaction. Since the latter
is observed clinically to be simple and unvarying it is called a reflex. 
Other parts of the environment present us with situations of great complexity with 
details of greatly varying "weight": such situations cannot possibly be met 
with a stock reaction; the latter must be complicated and variable to fit.
This latter is called "higher behaviour." Obviously there is no essential 
difference between the two types of environment and equally, therefore there is 
no essential difference between the two types of reaction.

We may note, however, that where the stimuli are extremely simple
and can be adequately answered by the simplest and most constant type of 
reflex, and where this state of affairs has lasted for millions of years (corneal 
reflex for instance) then it is possible that heredity may come in and add
the mechanisms with the idea of getting the reflex done a little quicker and to save 
time in learning. But this latter will probably only come in the very lowest 
grade of reflex (cortical reflex particularly).

_________

4.1.31.

I was noticing today how Bonzo, having been run over, (?) away from every
car as soon as he hears it. How on earth can this be done neurologically? We can imagine 
Bonzo previously running into the road with the sound of a car vaguely in his ear when 
suddenly his cortex is "flooded with pain." This is quite a different reaction afterwards.
I have it. He noted (p. 220 et seq.) that an impulse passing raises resistance while

(73 of 260)

228.

an impulse not passing lowers resistance, i.e. in a general sort of way, the 
cortex is perverse and always tries to do the opposite of what it gets. We may 
now imagine the cortex as being set in a particular way. Along comes a flood
of impulses and this naturally sets the whole thing oppositely. We had concluded
some time ago that "pain reverses the reaction." I do not see the point perfectly
clearly in its details but I am near it.

_________

4.1.31.

Re the postulate of the geodelic path; a possible reason as to the mechanism by which 
this is brought about is that impulses will get to the motor exit more quickly after going 
only a short distance and hence may leave the cells in a "refractory" condition by the 
time the longer pathed impulses arrive. This needs elaboration in detail for the above 
is much too sketchy.

__________

4.1.31.

There is a fundamental point in philosophy emerging from this work and that is that 
if there were no laws in nature, there could be no intelligence in a nerve net.

__________

4.1.31.

I may note here that the concept of a "stopped" impulse is becoming so frequent 
that it is obvious that the old rigid concept of perviation must be given up, and replaced
by a less rigid concept. After all, total irradiation does not occur after every
stimulus so some synapses must refuse the impulse, and if one synapse can do it 
then there is no reason why all might not do it.

__________

(74 of 260)

229.

5.1.31.

It seems to me that trying to use chronaxy exclusively as the regulating mechanism 
leads to certain difficulties. Firstly one can scarecely imagine a nerve cell naturall
using chronaxy as a means of attaining virovanophilia - chronaxy is a rather unnatural
way of doing it, especially as it would have no significance in a single celled
animal. Chronaxy, therefore, lacks the fundamental, primitive correctness and 
obviousness which it should have. Another difficulty is that if the passage of 
an impulse raises the resistance of the synapse, it would have to do this, in a 
chronaxy system by separating the chronaxies. Now in a reaction involving the 
cortex, the impulse would traverse a long chain of neurons, leaving all 
the synapses resistant. If one try to assign chronaxy values which will do this,
we find that all the hypotheses are improbably, i.e. (a) it might put 
chronaxies up and down alternately, (b) it might raise each one above the last; 
this would lead to enormous values in the last cells with the necessity of coming down 
again to get to the muscles, or (c) it might (raise/lower) the chronaxy of the dendrons it 
leaves and (lower/reaise) that of the one it is entering so that the chronaxy change would 
be only the dendron just near the synapse. All these seem to me to be 
improbably and to lack that obviousness which is so desirable.

On the other hand there may be place for chronaxy and synapse resistance,
particularly since the chronaxy is almost certain to be correlated with other physiological
properties such as length of refractory pediod, velocity of impulse conduction,
and velocity of synapse-resistance-recovery. Chronaxy would then still remain 
valuable for it would give a bias to the undifferentiated nervous system,
keeping it to develop its early reactions quickly. As soon as one realises that 

(75 of 260)

230.

chronaxy is almost certainly correlated with the other quantities outlined above, one 
realises that Lapricque's and Bourguignon's work becomes open to other interpretations.
Note how the autonomic system works without isochronism. If this is verified it 
throws chronaxy as such out of court at once.

____________

6.1.31.

It has just occurred to me that the infant's sucking reflex, instead of occupying a small
part of the C.N.S. with a few cells minutely cannot in their arrangement, may occupy the 
whole C.N.S., especially cortex, the reaction being determined by the broad (?)
of the C.N.S.. Later, as the cortex becomes more differentiated the sucking reflex bcomes lost,
or better buried, (since kissing still remains). This latter concept is perhaps preferable,
especially on psychological grounds. If we assume that as one reaction is replaced by 
another, the older reaction is merely buried but not lost, we see that this concept
will fit psychology much better. But soft, by the principles of modification and 
adaptation by inhibition we see that we cannot speak of an old and then a new reaction;
the second must be a modification and elaboration of the old. Again we return to the 
old idea of a large simple pattern being gradually converted into a large 
intricate pattern. Naturall in this latter pattern we may, by a process analogous to the 
smoothing of curves, gradually "smooth" the pattern until we get back to the original.

We may note here that if the sucking reflex is concerned with the broad outlines 
of the C.N.S. the latter may be concerned anatomically as well as physiologically. This
way, on close examination of the timing of the reflex, show that the frosser analogy
of the C.N.S. and the sucking reflex may be intimately connected. We may note that

 
(76 if 260)

231.

so far I have been dealing perfectly generally with nerve nets. The anatomy of, say,
man's C.N.S. must come in somewhere.

______________

6.1.31.

Last night, in the dead of night, a sudden minute creak occurred. Just 
a minute, sudden creak and nothing more. The effect was far more devastating than
something complicated happening, and in fact, I can testify from personal experience
that the smaller the stimulus the more devastating the effect. Again
therefore we note the importance of the mutual influence of impulses.

______________

6.1.31.

Note on excitability. Once or twice, in a lapse from grace, I have been 
tempted to think of nerve cells which have not been stimulated for some time as getting 
in a state where they feel they simply must do something or bust. I repent of such 
unnatural thoughts and shall not do it again. Obviously a nerve cell, or a Paramecium
would like nothing better than to be still, well fed, warm and with ever need 
supplied and would be quite willing to do so for even if the circumstances permitted.
THe apparent rise in irritability after long inaction is simply due to the fact that 
all the other calls are jolly well fed up with having to do all the work and are trying 
harder and harder to push the impulses off on to the others. The latter, not knowing 
what is happening lie and dream peacefully with their doors wide open until at last 
the active cells get so resistant but the impulses are forced on the other 
cells. Virovanophilia is quite sufficient. No cell or anything else ever gets 
tired of inaction.

_______________

6.1.31.

Note on the mathematics of patterns, if the pattern were a sine curve we could deal with

(77 of 260)

232.

it by a Fourier analysis. With a pattern in n dimensions therefore, we might apply 
an n-dimensional Fourier analysis to it. In the case of a chronaxy pattern in the cortex 
we would need 3 dimensions of space, one to represent chronaxy value and one to represent
time, giving 5 dimensions in all. If we superimpose on it an impulse pattern
we then get something much more complicated still.

_____________

7.1.31.

Note on unit impulse and intensity of stimuli. We may note that since (p. 225)
intensity is impulse frequency, a unit impulse can have no intensity, whether high or 
low since it has no frequency. And since the width of irradiation is proportional
to the frequency, it would look as though a unit impulse must irradiate at all, or 
rather, that it would have an entirely indeterminate width of irradiation. 

_____________

8.1.30.

Synapse is a membrane, therefore it can have resistance raised due to polarisation etc, like
any other membrane phenomenon such as nerve, muscle, receptor, etc. will therefore have 
refractory period like these.

I have decided to speak of conductivity of synapse since it is easier to say that 
cond = o rather than resistance = infinity. Except that the idea of resistance is more in
accordance with virovanophilia. In practice it does not matter at all.

Conductivity of synapse after impulse passing : - 

(hand-drawn graph)

Irritability of receptor after impulse emitted : -

(hand-drawn graph)

(78 of 260) 

233.

therefore every synapse might be called a receptor, which it is as far as the cells 
following it are concerned.

Therefore every synapse will have the same essential features as a receptor, which are : - 

1) Muller's law of specific nerve energies
2) Threshold 
3) Summation
4) Weber-Fechen law
5) Local sign 
6) Influenced by drugs, some highly specific (c.f. gymnemic acid on taste)
7) Fatigue ?????
8) May be collected and arranged in complex organs.
9) Vary in "quickness" - latent period
                         abs. refractory period
                         rel. __________ ______
                         duration of after effect, if any

Thus we have : -

Irritability of receptor or synapse after impulse : - 

(hand-drawn graph)

Therefore irritability of receptor or synapse during absolutely constant stimulation.

(hand-drawn graph)

(79 of 260)

234.

Irritability or conductivity, impulse not passed : -

(hand-drawn graph)

Now that of chances in synapse under stimulation by burst of impulses from receptor?
This question is absolutely fundamental for it applies equally to a second synapse
dealing with impulses coming from the first synapse and so on ad infinitum.

Several possibilities to be considered : -

1) Synapse and receptor "times" a) equal 
                                b) synapse slower
                                c) receptor slower

2) Varying logachron difference "d" at synapse < low medium high

3) Impulse falling in refractory period had a) no effect at all
                                            b) adds summation effect

4) a) Can    pass if impulses summates in spite of high "d".
   b) Cannot _________________________ because  of ________.

First, for practise try 1) a, 2) low, 3) a, we get: : -

receptor : - (hand-drawn graph)

Nerve : - (hand-drawn graph)

Synapse : - (two hand-drawn graphs)

(80 of 260)

235.

exactly all, or exactly half, or 1/3rd etc. of impulses to pass.

Now if, after the passage of an impulse,
the synapse returns absolutely to the condition in which it was at the beginning,
then, since in the illustration, at each secon dimpulse it goes back to the beginning,
then variations in 1), 2), 3), anf 4) make no difference except that it 
may pass every third instead of every second impulse, but the phenomenon is still 
absolutely regular.

Thus, receptor fast (strong stimulus), synapse slow : -

(two hand-drawn graphs)

?   Now what are we going to do? The result depends entirely on where we put d.
If we put d high it will pass about every fifth perhaps while if we put d low 
enough it will pass every impulse no matter how quickly they come.

We may note that we are not really concerned with the receptor at the other 
end of the neuron, we are really concerned with the behavior of a synapse when
submitted to varying frequencies of impulse arrival. Thus we can cut out receptor 
and simply deal with impulses arriving, thus -

(hand-drawn graph)

Now suppose we make the impulses ever so much more frequent : - 

(hand-drawn graph) 

as soon as the irritability reaches

(81 of 260)

236.

d, an impulse arrives, if infinitely frequent and stimulates it. Therefore under infinite
stimulation every synapse has a natural, maximal frequency of discharge depending on d 
and on the refractory period of the synapse.

Now as the arriving impulses' frequency slows, the emitted frequency 
lessens slowly at first and then more rapidly : -

(two hand-drawn graphs)

Imagine an impulse, any one arriving first when the synapse is just 
below d and then over d. As it passes on, another impulse then takes its place
and restimulates just when at d and so on until finally there is not another  
impulse to follow the first : -

(hand-drawn graph)

Therefore if we graph synapse frequency and impulse frequency we ge this sort of thing.

(hand-drawn graph)

I will stop here to think this over.

_________________________________

(82 of 260)

237.

Continuing the graph on the previous page, a close examination of the phenomena 
shows that the exact relationship between frequency of impulses arriving (imp. freq.) and 
frequency of impulses post (synapse freq.) will be given by the graph on p. 238. A. 

If we deal with wave lengths (assuming velocity constant) we get the relation
shown in B. This however is not so, clear so will deal only with frequencies of 
impulses.

The formula for graph A.

Let a = maximal synapse frequency.
    i = impulse frequency
    s = synapse frequency
    n = i/a (a pure number without dimensions)

Then s =  a * n 
         ________ ............................. (1)
         1 + I(n)

Where I(n) = the integral part of n.

Since   n                                        n
      ______   will occur often we will define ______   as the F funciton of n.
 
      1 + I(n)                                 1 + I(n)

                           x
Thus, in general F(x) =  _____
                        1 + I(x)

Therefore S = a F(n) ......................... (2)

We may note, in passing that F(x) varies from o -> 1.
It cannot exceed 1. This of course is reasonable since s cannot exceed
a. Can F(x) be negative? What is a negative frequency? Obviously
impulses going in the opposite direction. We notice that 
F(x) is not symmetrical about O since it is 1 + I(x). Plotting this backwards we 

(83 of 260)

238.

(two hand-drawn graphs)

(84 of 260)

239.

(hand-drawn graph)

(85 of 260)

240. 

graph. C. p. 239. It might be tempting to observe the shoot to - infinity at n less than -1
but I believe that to be an artificiality due to the fact that we have considered synapses
as (hand-drawn graph) and not (hand-drawn graph). Obviously there is no a priori reason
why one should be selected. I am not quite clear here however and it may be worth 
nothing as an expression of the law of "forward direction." Note that according 
to the graph, if n is less than -2, then reflection occurs, since S is everywhere positive.

But I think we have gone far enough here, for we not introduced anything to 
allow for summation. We have no allowed anything for the impulses which fall in 
the refractory period. These, especially if only just failing, must have some ffect.

Furthermore, we have considered as identical the following : - 

(two hand-drawn graphs)

As far as the exact 
curve of the refractory period is concerned following each impulse. Both the above variations
have to be dealt with.

____________

9.1.31.

We noted on p. 224 that an impulse falling without on a receptor or 
synapse heightens the sensitivity or conductivity. We have already seen from 
quite different evidence that a blocked impulse should lower resistance. If after 
a single blocked impulse, the conductivity is raised thus : -

(hand-drawn diagram) 

then we see that the second impulse
may fall in different places on the curve and will therefore get through or not according

(86 of 260)

241. 

both to its intensity and to its timing or frequency. We may therefore construct a 
graph of the frequency necessary to get through, the other variable being the 
intensity of the stimulus. It will go like this : - (2 impulses only)

(hand-drawn diagram)


The line represents the dividing line between the second impulse passing and not passing.
We note that in any receptor or synapse there are two thresholds, 1) the threshold
to unit stimulus, and b) the summation threshold. The latter may depend 
on whether a single second impulse arrives or whether a chain of secondary impulses
arrive for the latter may, perhaps, pile summation upon summation. At the moment
I have no means of telling. In the above curve the exact curve taken by the 
dividing line will depend upon the exact nature of the summation curve (hand-drawn graph).
But the above curve is really only the "reciprocal" of the summation curve for 
intensity to the reciprocal of irritability and frequency the reciprocal of time or wave length.

________________

Going back to p. 237 we may ask, what if we put in an impulse of frequency 
i and let it go through synapses a(1), a(2), a(3), etc. Since s = aF(i/a)
we show, by stages, that the following occurs. If after going through a(1) a(2) a(3)

(87 of 260)

242.

The impulse has frwquencies i(1) i(2) i(3)

(hand-drawn diagram)

a(1) = receptor

i(2) = a(2)F(i(1)/a(2))               = G(i(1), a(2))
i(3) = a(3)F[a(2)/a(3)*F(i(1)/a(2))]  = G(i(1), a(2), a(3))
i(4) = a(4)F[a(3)/a(4)*F(i(1)/a(2))]  = G(i(1), a(2), a(3), a(4))

Since this goes on endlessly we may call this "series" the G. function. Thus if we know 
we have a receptor emitting impulses of frequency i, and that it goes through synapses
x y and z we know that the final frequency will be G(i(1) x y z)

(88 of 260)

243.

Re the G function are the terms interchangeable? 

i.e. is G(i(1) x y) = G(i(1) y x) ?

Expanding we find

G(i x y)                 G(i y x)

y F {(x/y) * F(i/x)}      x F {(y/x) * F(i/y)}


y F {(x/y)  *  i/x     }  x F {(y/x)  *  i/y     }       
              _____                    _______
              1+I(i/x)                 1 + I(i/y)


y F {      i       }      x F {      i       }      
       ___________               __________
       y{1+I(i/x)}               x{1+I(i/y)} 
    


       i                             i
  ____________          ? =     ____________
   1 + I (i/x)                   1 + I(i/y)

_________________           ___________________

  1 + I {    i     }         1 + I {    i       }
          ________                  _________
        y{1+I(i/x)}                 z{1+I(i/y)}


This gets too complicated; it is much easier to test it on the graph.
I must stop now but will note that I cannot, so far, make them different.
Perhaps one synapse, therefore will dominate the whole show. This suggests that if the 
synapses from the vesiculse seminales are very "slow" they may dominate the pattern 
until they are stopped. Hence dominance of sex and pain.* (wild but smart hypothesis)

___________________________

*Note that this would be a slow and gentle process. Obviously a slow, and therefore gentle stimulus could not
stand up against a stimulus of high intensity and therefore high frequency. Pain, by the way, must
come out of this as it is of high frequency.

(89 of 260)


244. 

(?) ourselves to Mars, so to speak, and looking at the C.N.S. from a great
distance, we may ask again, what is the fundamental pattern of the C.N.S.? I think 
we may answer this in a new way by saying that it is a question of finding the 
right motor exit. The impulses are like a herd of sheep in a field 
chased by the dog until they go through the right gate, then the "irritation"
stops.

Now we  may therefore suggest that that is also the pattern facing each cell -
find the right exit, only in this case it has to find dendron.

We may note that if a dendron sends an impulse by route A instead of 
route B, the result is not the same since the timing has been altered.

(hand-drawn diagram)

On this hypothesis, both finding the right exit and timing boil down to the 
same as soon as one gets down to cells.

It may be noted that any reaction which uses that particular group of cells
have to see them in the same way every time. If some other stimulus is not "fitted"
by that group, then an early sorting of the stimuli will have to occur, sending them 
to some other group. This suggests that the C.N.S. consists of a series of groups
or "centres" with the impulse meeting first a preliminary sorting, then a secondary 
and finer sorting and so on, and that they reach various centres and then go to the motor

(90 of 260)

245. 

exit. Of course the "centres" would be large and small and would be, so to speak,
infinitely peppered over the C.N.S. This is more or less the neurologists' present
point of view.

_______________

1.31.31.

How many impulses are concerned in leaving a  reaction like motor
car driving?

Assume : - 

Area covered by one rod or cone = 10 (?)
(?) of retina = 2 cm.

Frequency of emission of impulses by 1 rod or cone = 10/sec.

Duration of learning period = 10 hours actual driving.

Then we find that the total visual impulses received during learning 
equals about 10^14 ! If there are 10^10 cells in the cortex, and all were 
stimulated equally, and that there was no amplification, then each cell would
receive about 10^4 = 10,000 impulses from visual sources alone.

I had an idea that perhaps whenever an impulse went through a synapse it modified 
it permanently. We now see at once that there is simply no point in postulating an 
absolutely permanent memory if a thousandth of a second later another 
impulse passes and modifies the synapse again absolutely permanently. There is 
no room for such a waste of permanency, for if the effect lasts a few 
(?) that would be quite long enough.

When we realise that learning to read, to speak, ot walk etc all take
days at least of actual learning time we realise the colassal number of 
impulses necessary to develop these reactions - colossal not merely in the total

(91 of 260)

246.

number involved but colossal in the number that cross each synapse.

________________

1.31.31.

We may note that if two impulses going in opposite directions happen to meet 
in an axon, dendron, or cell body (cylon) they will cancel each other out.
Obviously a lot of this must occur in the C.N.S. especially in the cortex where the 
nerve cells form so complicated a nerve net. This may be the simple way in
which the pyramidal tract inhibits lower reflexes - by throwing in impulse sin the 
reverse direction so that they meet the oncoming impulses and destroy them.
This however needs some suggestions as to how the pyramidal tract, mostly inhibitory
is also, in voluntary movement, actively excitatory. Or does the pyramidal merely 
cease sending inhibitory impulses? This latter is certainly the simpler explanation.
Further, this cancellation of impulses is ideal from the point of view of virovanophilia.

_______________

14.1.31.

With regard to virovanophilia and the tendency of impulses to be a minimum, we may note 
that the impulses concerned are of two types which have very different properties. Looking at
the organism from the biological point of view we see that pain impulses are fundamental
for they mean that damage to the organism is actually happening - not is going to happen
but is happening now. On the other hand all the other impulses are what one might call 
"discriminative" or "signalling" impulses, and are desirable or undesirable purely according 
to whether pain is or is not associated with them. They do not exist for themselves but 
perely for the purposes of working with the pain impulses. we may imagine them 
as forming endless patterns in the C.N.S. If it is found that a given pattern is 
associated with pain, then that pattern in future becomes taboo and must not be 
formed in future and must, if possible, be avoided if it shows signs of developing.


(92 of 260)

It is not, I think, unreasonable to postulate two types of impulses, in spite of the 
fact that the physiologists only recognize one. We cannot assume thaht pain stimuli
are absolutely on a par with all other stimuli since it is known clinically and 
experimentally that pain has a "weigh" far above other stimuli as a controller and  
determiner of action.

Now physical pain in adults occurs but selfom. We must therefore assume
that the effect of pain is most marked in early years and that the lessons learnt
then are, as it were, profoundly branded into the C.N.S. so that the effect
ramifies in larger and larger directions. We have seen previously that "pain
reverses the reactions."

We might, therefore, look on the nervous system in a new light. We would 
see endless "discriminatory" impulses pouring in and forming endless patterns, quite 
indefinitely and quite indifferently. Suddenly pain arrives. This, in some way,
upsets the apple cart, and the patters which are present are prompty reversed
and the old suddenly become taboo. Then again, as soon as pain has gone, the endless 
pattern formation goes on as before.

If however the nervous system were indifferent to all the "discriminatory" 
impulses, then the principle of virovanophilia would lose to unversality. There are 
certainly degrees of "weights" among stimuli. It is rather a pronlem to know 
what it consists of. We have seen that the intensity of a stimulus on a receptor 
is measured by impulse-frequency. Can it all be a question of frequency,
with pain impulses vastly more frequent than, say, touch?

We have noted previously that where two impulse patterns exactly superimpose
there will be a reduction impulses but where they do not superimpose, the impulse-

(93 of 260)

248.

-bursts will reinforce one another to produce a higher frequency. If a high
frequency is the same as pain, then this might explain the "pain" of conflict,
and the absence of pain when everything "fiths" nicely. In such a case the 
"weight" of any impulse-burst would be its frequency. As the frequency 
increased, at first the premanent effect would be nil, while as it increases,
the permanent effect would suddenly rise enourmously. It has occurred to me 
that this might possibly happen by an actual breaking or permanent disablement
of the synapses so that the particular pattern, or any part of it could never
arise again. This might explain the (?) degeneration of neurons found in 
dementia praecox. It would also involve a shutting down of paths rather than 
an opening up, that is fairly satisfactory. Naturally, after the paths have 
been shut, impulses would have to take new paths, thus leading somehow to a 
new reaction.

____________

15.1.31.

We may note that if an impulse pattern is developing in a nerve net, and is going on 
and on, then a change in one synapse will start to affect the pattern at this 
point, and as the pattern goes on developing, so this point of difference will spread 
and spread until ultimately the whole pattenr will be different. If the synapse merely
changes for one impulse and then goes back to the previous condition it will be enough
eventually to alter the whole pattern (unless that little bit was done to be 
blocked out an instant later). If the synapse remains different, then the pattern
will steadily depart more and more from the normal until ultimately it will be,
I think, entirely different.

_____________


(94 of 260)

249.

I have just been reading (?), Ref. 203. again and again one finds that wave 
motions are far and away the most potent means of explaining natural phenomenon. One sees
the way in which wave motions explain light, electrons etc etc even to such definitely
non-wave phenomenon as the diffusion of salts and heat. Again and again I have 
also met, especially in the economic system with the fact that the "organism as a 
whole," or the "layer" unit, always seems merely to acheive the same results, in 
its large way, as the small unit achieves in its. If this principle holds good
through all organisation, then one might conceivably find that just as electrons
behave like waves, so also behavior, which is really only the movement
of protons and electrons, may turn out to be capable of being represented by 
wave systems. 

I have already noted that the irradation of strong stimuli might be 
considered to resemble resonance phenomena. We might therefore by 
developing a wave theory of C.N.S. function. The nerve cells might be considered
as resonators.

We may note one fundamental distinction between orginary and "behaviors"
waves. In irradiation, as the frequency increases so more and more neurons commence 
to "resonate." This is quite different from tuning forks etc, which only resonate
at one frequency and as the frequency is raised, stop resonating. We may therefore 
reframe the idea of irradiation and resonators by saying that all neurons, or 
synapses (or both) have a certain frequency - below this frequency they remain 
unaffected, above this frequency they resonate. To transfer the same idea a 
step backwards and applying it to receptors we see that stimuli must be 
reconsidered as frequencies. This, however, need not concern us at the moment.

(95 of 260)

250.

Virovanophilia would then correspond to some such principle as the number of waves 
always tends to a minimum, or the sum of frequencies tends to a minimum, or 
some such principle.

From the fusion of the two (binocular) fields of vision we would conclude 
that like frequencies, in a sense, attract one another; and to allow for small 
variations we would have to assume that the attraction was 
more or less intensely proprotional to the difference in frequencies. This will result,
just as outlined previously, in the two patterns meeting so far as possible. It also 
"explains" more or less iso-ordinal integration. Re the formation of a conditioned reflex,
the two stimuli, producing probably different frequencies, those latter would 
nevertheless be attracted to each other since, under the necessary experimental
conditions, there is no other frequency to exert a counteracting pull.

One of the disadvantages of working out a theory in psychology in that instead of 
merely having to continue half a dozen fundamental laws into one law, one has 
thousands and thousands of isolated facts, all apparently independant, each of which 
has to be tested separately to see if it conforms or disproves the theory, for since 
the facts are all scattered and isolated, one may construct a theory which may explain 
most, without noticing that there is one fact which did not happen to be 
specifically tested which ruins and disproves the whole theory. However -

_________________

19.1.31. 

Note on the anatomy of levels. I find it difficult to find any anatomical explanation
of levels. Suppose the levels are connected by a dendron from the upper going round 
the cell body of the lever. THis might explain how the upper level "watches" the lower.

(hand-drawn diagram)


(96 of 260)

251.

26.1.31.

It seens to me that there is quite a good case to be made out for absolutely permanent 
memory for everything, with the obvious deduction that therefore every cell bust "reenter"
every impulse which passes through it. We have two or perhaps several clinical variaties 
of memory a) focally for recalling a sensory impression so that we can "see" in our 
imagination what we saw previously, b) immediate preservatory memory c) repressed
memory, d) memories which cannot be recalled explicitly but which still persist and 
help to mould our reactions e) the opposite - ordinary forgetting etc.

Now some are of the opinion that memory due to traces left in neurons is
impossible. Nevertheless, it is a principle that unnecessary hypotheses should never 
be introduced without some justification (ref. 218). Not having read the books, I do 
not see any justification, so propose first to postulate an "absolute cellular 
memory," by which mean quite simply that every cell "remembers" or has available 
in some way, a complete record of all the impulses which have passed through it.
It may or may not remember impulses which arrived at its boundaries but 
did not pass - probably not, I should say. Now the memory will require
to know about each impulse. 1) point of entry 
                            2) point or points of departure
                            3) internal between it and preceeding impulse
                            4) internal between it and next impulse

3 and 4 are rather redundant, for 4 is merely the 3 of the next impulse. Now 
according to virovanophilia we would suspect that the cell, on receiving an impulse,
would note its point of entry and how long it was since the last came through and would 
then try to determine the points of departure so as to imitate that previous impulse
which made 4) as long as possible. This looks unhelpful for we may note that 

(97 of 260)

252.

making 4) as long as possible is really equivalent to rendering the intensities 
of stimuli as small as possible since stimulus intensity is impulse frequency.
We may also note here an opening for conflict to enter.

We may note that if a cell has E points of entry, these may be combind 
in a number of ways amongst themselves, and of these most can be combined with variations 
in 3), so that the total possible combinations is large for each cell. We may note therefore 
a second and fundamental difference between 1 and 2 and 3 and 4. It is that 1 and 2 
are both discontinuous, i.e. you cannot change by imperceptible gradations from
an impulse coming up one dendron to an impulse coming up another dendron. Both 
points of entry and departure are discontinuous. On the other hand 3 and 4 are both 
fundamentally continuous and permit of the minutest, infinitesimal gradations from one 
interval to the next. We must suppose, therefore, being unwilling to impose 
omniscience on a nerve cell, that it can only measure time to the nearest St units.
Should two intervals differ by less than this, then the cell will treat them as 
though identical. Apart from the question of the unlikelihood of infinite accuracy we 
may also note that a certain amount of give and take on the part of the cell is very
desirable, since we can severely expect the receptors under a given stimulus to send 
out impulses with an infinitely exact timing - that is asking too much. (Heaven 
knows we've asked enough already).

The cell therefore, on receiving a chain of impulses (note again the importance 
of there being a burst of impulses) will therefor "say" - "Now let me see, I have 
had impulses coming up dendrons 8 and 12 before and they had a timing just like these.
Now when I sent them out down axon A, they increased a bit. Down axon B
they increased a lot, down axon C they decreased a bit and shown axon D they

(98 of 260)

253.

decreased a lot immediately afterwards. Well then, I will try them down D first, 
and if they don't stop soon I will try C, and so on, and if reduced to 
desperation I may even try B."

We may note that the cell may find that an impulse up dendron 7 goes 
out best down axon D, while an impulse up dendron 18 goes out best by dendron
B(4). In that case, and assuming that the condition last for a time we 
have a crossed path in the neuron.

The proof of a postulate is the deductions therefrom. Now what can we deduce? 

______________________

28.1.31.

Reactions are saturated with memory. Memory at once becomes far more important
than the mere subjective trick of being able to re-picture an incident.

______________________

29.1.31.

I have just read a short story "a night in a wax morks." A girl decides to spend
a night in wax works just to see what it was like. She is quite calm at first, and keeps all 
the statues in their proper place mentally as waxworks. As the night goes on, however,
she gets more and more excited and finally collapses mentally. What is happening physiologically?
Obviously the max works, since they look half like people and half like waxworks are 
stimulating her into two directions at once. Hence conflict. At first, the purely superficial
visual impression, which is trying to develop into patterns and reactions suitable ot living people 
is inhibited by the other stimuli, such as seeing "Waxworks" in large letters outside 
the building, and all the rest. At first the pattern is inhibited. Gradually however this 
inhibition fails leading to severe conflict and "escape" or "overflow" phenomena and finally
leading to chaos.

This (hypothetical) occurrence illustrates well the possibility of conflict between

(99 of 260)

254.

stimuli and it also illustrates the essential independance of stimuli, i.e. that 
is-ordinal integration does not occur completely and to a finish. On the contrary,
the stimuli and patterns are all essentially independant and can often integrate
only with effort, and this effort may fail. We must note that two patterns in 
the cortex will tend to integrate, particularly if neither is itself capable of adequate 
action, i.e. if neither canget out, then they will integrate and try to develop a new 
pattern which shall be able to get out. On the other hand, if each has ready 
a perfectly obvious and open a motor exit to it, then they will tend merely to fight like cat 
and dog for possession of the motor exil. Here we have an example of the latter, for 
the reactions appropriate to both "living people" and "Wax works" are all ready, so the 
two sets fight for possession.This idea gives some sort of a clue as to why integration
occurs so markedly in the cortex and so lithe in the reflex centres - simply because in the 
latter, the stimuli and reactions being both simple, any stimulus has almost always a 
reaction more or less appropriate to it, so that if there are two stimuli, each 
has an appropriate reaction, so it is simply a question of "reciprocal innervation" of reactions;
on the other hand, in the cortex, appropriate reactions are not always available, so two 
patterns must wait and integrate until they are properly adjusted for action.

_________________________

26.2.31.

It has occurred to me that a good deal of the dementia praecox psychology and 
symptomatology may be explained by assuming that the D.P. suffers from a "can't wait"
(?), that the difficulty is essentially one of a difficulty in delaying, in time, a reaction
pattern that is ready for conation. I have noticed particularly in myself that if I am
going to do something big in a definite future occasion, I have the greatest difficulty
(and often fail) in preventing myself from encompassing the whole thing phantasy.

(100 of 260)

255. 

This idea has further implications, for it seems probable that no reaction is ever repressed
and done with, it merely waits. The child with its Oedipus complex never abandons
hope in its unconscious, it merely waits until a mere favorable time comes. The child
may grow old and die before the time arrives, but essentially it is merely writing, it 
has not repressed and done with its complex by any mean.

This idea, that the D.P. has difficulty in waiting thus explains the fundamental
feature of the D.P., which is that I cannot keep his complexes in order.

All the other end of the scale, this hypothesis offers an obvious link with the 
physiology of the brain, and has obvious analogies with the delayed reflexes. Pavlov
has noted the great difficulty which dogs have in delaying a reflex pattern which 
is ready for conation.

This idea would explain the D.P.'s marked tendency to fly into phantasy
since this offers an escape from the intolerable waiting and doing nothing. It would 
also explain their rapid flight to masturbation as soon as sex impulses come. It would 
explain the turbulence of their complexes since these would be incessantly breaking through 
in various ways.*

We may note, from the more theoretical point of view, that there is no trouble
at all in delaying a pattern which is not ready for conation, indeed it is just the
opposite. For there to be difficulty, the pattern must be complete and ready, and
the time must be unpropitious. Under such conditions, a state of great 
strain ensues. Now what does this mean in terms of neurons?

______________________

16.3.31.

Lectures by K.S. Lashley at King's College.

Stated by describing a reaction of (?), a worm which lives in ponds.

*Note also rapid development of extravagent father etc images.

(101 of 260)

256.

This worm has been found to carry cnidocytes in the ectoderm. These are only found 
in the coelenterates and it was thought that this must be an example of a weapon
being developed twice. It appears however that (?) eats Hydra, This is 
digested and a certain number of undischarged cnidocysts set free in the alimentory 
tract. These are picked up by the amoeboid endoderm and passed in to the ectoderm.
Here they are picked up by "white corpuscles," carried to the exterior, where they 
are orientated so as to point to the outside and are then pushed through the skin so 
that only the cnidocid protudes. The while cells remain as attendant cells. The
animal eats Hydra only when th enumber of cnidocytes falls below a certain
number. Usually they are distributed at regular intervals over the body of the animal.
When the number of cnidocytes falls below the full complement, the animal 
eats Hydra vigorously, and will even reject other food already taken to obtain 
Hydra. When it has its full number, however, it will not look at Hydra.

How we have a perfect exaample of full intelligence and minute adaptation carried
out without any nervous system. It might be described as mind without brain.

He discussed the mating reflex of the mole rat. It has been found, by surgical
deprivation, and by experiments with models that the essential stimulus in an object,
of size within certain limits, moving quickly and jerkily over the ventral skin. The 
mole rat exhibits the reflex without hesitation even when brough up in solitude,
thus eliminating the question of imitation. The immature rat shows no sign of any sex
activity up to the age of about 84 days, then the animal suddenly shows it in full.
Castrated males supplied with female hormone behave just like female rats, even to 
nest building and caring for the young. Similarly spayed females with male grafts behave
just like males, and mount females which are in heat.

(102 of 260)

257.

Discussing emotion and especially the James-Lange theory, a group of people were 
tested with various strong stimuli of various enchonial types and were photographed in the 
act. The person also recorded their subjective feelings. It was found that the 
expressions were of very varied type and showed no connection either with the stimulus 
or with the emotion recorded by the person. Apparently there are only two instinctive
expressions of emotion - laughter and tears, and these two appeared merely as gained 
indicators of any strong emotion. it seems as though all the complex expressions
often recorded, are not natural but are more conventionalised face signs for
the purpose of communicating with those around. He regards emotion as being 
merely a subjective feeling that the C.N.S. is in violent activity, and that the various
physical concomitants are merely "overflow" phenomena.

He said that it is probable that the whole C.N.S. is active in any given 
reaction, and not just one path.

Second lecture :- Child has ground up Hydrozoon to obtain a suspention of
separated cells. On putting these together in a heap, they stick together and then 
grow into a normal Hydrozoon! Growth is almost certainly controlled and directed
by dominance, by the diffusion of chemicals and so on.

It is found in rats with the brightness discrimination test (Yorke's box) and 
maze tests that memory is upset by any marginal interference with the cortex.
He suggests that memory consists of the building up of a differentiation in the cortex of 
"patches" of different "potential," the memory depending on the presence of the patches, and 
of the mutual relations between them. Consequently the removal of any part will 
upset the whole lot, leaving a disordered jumble.

He suggests that the cortex is a "smooth" homogenous gtroundwork over

(103 of 260)

258. 

which patterns of impulses may develop and move, like waves over a pond.
He even showed a picture of two rods tapping the surface of a dish of water and 
producing steady, permanent interference phenomena! (This puts paid to a 
paper I wrote a few months ago, but which is not yet published, putting 
forward exactly the same ideas and even using the same illustration (in words)).

To show the ease with which reactions can be transferred in the C.N.S.
be told of a monkey in which he removed the left motor area of the cortex so 
as to paralyse the right arm. The monkey was then taught to open a trick box 
using its left hand. It never used the right. The right motor cortex was 
then removed. The animal, when shown the box, fumbled for a moment with 
its left hand and, finding it unsatisfactory owing to the paralysis, opened the box 
with perfect ease and precision with the right. The right hand and motor tracts
had never been used previously for this action.

He apparently believes that the reflexes depend on inborn, almost anatomical
paths.

To show the functional independance of the impulses in the tracts of the spinal
corn, he subjected a rat to double spinal hemisection at different levels.
Result : - the animal walked etc perfectly, although the impulses must have 
been using actively different paths to this usual or standard paths.

___________________

21.3.31

I have just been reading about the psychoanalytic imago, and how it serves 
as an unconscious standard. There are different imagos, father-
imago, mother imago, self-imago etc etc. I see no reason however why this 
concept should not be extended to cover all C.N.S. activities as well as the more 


(104 of 260)

259. 


obvious psychoanalytic activities. I saw a man conducting 
a band. There is no reason why we should not find an unconscious time-imago
being an idealised representation of how it should be played. The conductor will 
of course endlessly strive to get the band to play so that it corresponds 
with his idea of how it should be played, i.e. to get it to correspond with his 
time imago. If he has a clear cut imago, well within the reach of his band,
then he may achieve such. If however he has a vague dream of perfection
then he will be disappointed. We may postulate, therefore, an imago for 
all C.N.S. activities. The imago will then consist of a condition, state
or configuration on the C.N.S. which is not satisfied until it has adapted
the incoming impulses into a certain pattern. This imago configuration
has one important property which is that it develops*, it is endlessly changing 
and endlessly leading on the individual like a will o' the wisp. If it is 
satisfied then it promptly starts developing further and demanding more.
? (to what objective is it developing?). The imago, however, is, or should
be chained to reality. If it develops too fast, without waiting for the 
situation or reality to say O.K. then it may get out of reach so that no
reasonable situation can fit. It then starts to cause trouble. It should 
always remain close to reality but just slightly beyond it. This may have 
something to do with D.P. The praecox as we have seen "cannot wait."
Perhaps his images cannot wait but develop fast and get out of hand.

This tendency for th eimago pattern and impulse pattern to fit reminds 
of the two visual patterns fititng, the principle of "superimposition of impulse
patters," except that the imago is certainly not an impulse pattern but corresponds

*Now called "elaboration."

(105 of 260)

260. 

more to something stable in the C.N.S., such as metabolic rate, chronaxy etc.
It seems to correspoond a little with Head's "schema."

__________

27.3.31.

Last night I woke up suddenly in the midst of a rather terrifying and exciting dream.
I forget the content of the dream but as I woke up, with a curious detachment of mind, I 
observed the essential light of the retina and the patterns it was forming to see if the patterns,
while the dream was still "present" in my mind, was any different from the ordinary 
nondescript patterns. Result : - at first the patterns were surprisingly vivid, well formed,
active and highly coloured. Large red, green, brown etc squares, jagged pieces, circular
rays etc were floating round, changing, moving, continuing, separating like a most 
brilliant kaleidoscope. As the emotion of the dream faded, or did the patterns
quiet and soften. I was not however fully awake and could not view them very 
dispassionately. There was, however, no doubt of the association between the 
vividness of the dream and the vividness of the visual pattern although there was no 
trace of any connection of actual shape or size or colour with the dream objects.
It seemed to me in a vague way that the one set "symbolised" the other, i.e.
that a green triangle might correspond in the essential light to say love, or a dog, 
or some purely psychological part of the dream, i.e. that the cerebral action pattern 
competent might be a dog, or a school, or love, at the psychological level. This 
observation confirms the impression which I have had, that the essential light of the 
retina has something to do with cortical function.

I noted that the patterns seemed somehow to be regular and repetitive i.e.
like this (hand-drawn diagram). I am unable to interpret this further, unless conceiveably

(106 of 260)

261. 

it has something to do with Lashley's idea of wave-length and phase periods etc.

_________

23.4.31.

Today I was reading my old diaries. I came across three types of entries : -

(a) "Had lunch"
(b) "Went to see Mrs Bennett"
(c) "Saw the driver sitting beside the smashed car with his cheek cut open 
and hanging like a flap"

Now (b) was remembered perfectly clearly. (a) and (c) were both totally forgotten. Now if 
we examine these three incidents to see what light they throw on memory.

First (a). Here we have an incident which has been repeated many 
times, all very similar to one another and I have failed to remember the particular 
incident although I remember the class of incident (having lunch at Beechbum)
quite well. Thus a memory may be unvariable simple because the incident 
is too similar to a mass of others. It is like putting a number of patterns on 
one another, all very similar, so that one is unable to trace any particular 
pattern very clearly. We may illustrate this by supposing that "lunch at 
Beechbum" has a pattern like (hand-drawn diagram); all the patterns or lunches
differ only slightly from one another. On superimposing we get : - 

(hand-drawn diagram) Fig. 1

It is quite obvious that under such conditions it is almost impossible to trace
any one lunch - the patterns are too similar. The contrast may be better 
shown by considering the opposite - i.e. superimposing widely different patterns.

(107 of 260)

262.

Suppose that reaction had a pattern (hand-drawn diagram), reaction or (?) (2) has a 
pattern (hand-drawn diagram), and reaction (3) a pattern (hand-drawn diagram), then superimposing them we 
get

(hand-drawn diagram) Fig 2. 

Here all these patterns can be seen at once and all 
quite distinctly from the others. We may conclude therefore that to be able to 
remember any given incident, it must first be sufficiently differentiated.

From (c) we see clearly that memories of a clear cut and impressive natur emay 
be repressed, while from (b) we see that a comparatively trivial nature may be 
well remembered. 

From this analysis we may conclude that for an event to be remembered,
(1) it must be sufficiently differentiated from all other similar memories, and (b) it must 
not conflict with anything else otherwise it may be repressed.

It will be now observed how closely memory is allied to a reaction; both may 
be insufficiently differentiated and both may be repressed. It is just possible that there 
is no fundamental difference between them. It is certainly possible to define memory 
objectively by saying that it represents that ability to produce a learned and intelligent 
reaction a second time.

_______________

25.apr.31.

I found a good example of the way in which virovanophilia continually drives the 
neurons to seek new reactions or paths. Try writing "14.4.31. rep.n. w/d" many 
times in succession. It is cozy at first but after a time it becomes more and more difficult

(108 of 260)

263. 

to produce that particular pattern; the urge to wander becomes almost irresistible.
It is, I think, experimental demonstration of my idea that neurons stimulated 
continuously soon start to try other switchings to see if the new switching will 
bring relief.

_________

9.5.31.

After the young praecox who "cannot wait" has had to wait, what happens?
Something definitely happens, something like dementia, but what?

________


12.5.31.

Lecture at Mary's Hospital by Ariens Kappers on "the functions of the
different layers of the cortex."

By comparing frogs, reptiles, mammals etc, particularly in the hypocampus one 
sees at first only two layers which are quite separated and lie side by side : - 

(hand-drawn diagram) Fig 1.

a granular layer and a pyramidal layer. The first is definitely receptor, the latter definitely
effector. The clear space above and below contains fibres from the cells. THe underneath 
part therefore corresponds to the white matter and the part above to the 1st layer. As we 
continue up the scale, we find that the pyramidal layer gradually slides underneath 
the granular layer so that in the primative neocortex we have two layers.

(hand-drawn diagram) Fig 2. 

(109 of 260)

264.

The impulses come in at the top and travel downwards.

Neurobiotaxis = phenomenon whereby all cells in C.N.S. always tend to grow 
towards incoming impulses, i.e. had to move against stream of impulses.

Ascending the scale further we find that the supragranular cortex develops 
from the granular layer, in spite of the fact that it contains pyramids, which 
makes it ressemble the infragranular cortex.

In animals belonging to the same order but if different size, such as 
(?), cat, Pekingese, St. Bernard, and so on, it is found every time that 
the large animal has some infragranular thickness, but that the supragranular 
is thicker while granular thickness is diminished, i.e. supragranular thickness
is positively correlated with size while granular thickness is negatively correlated.

Entering impulses appear to (?) in layer 1. 

Craigie, of Toronto, has done work on the vascularity of the human cortex and 
has found that the supragranular cortex tends to have a rather different blood 
supply from the rest of the cortex. Hence perhaps the changes in G.P.I., (and 
possibly in amentia and dementia).

By damaging the cortex and observing degenerations it has been forward that 
supragranular cortex connects up with the supragranular cortex in other parts of the 
brain and degenerated cells are found over a wide area after a localised injury.

The supragranular cortex in some parts is seen to have particularly large
pyramidal cells. This is noted specially in vesio-psychic area, frontal and acoustic 
areas. There is reason to believe that this marks an area of very wide spread 
associational distribution.

He has examined a brain showing microgyria. He found that the (?) 

(110 of 260)

265.

convolutions were markedly (?) and that when sectioned, the infragranular cortex 
saw straight across, while 
the granular and supragranular 
layers wer eturned up and
down, forming a sort of pseudo
convolution. Thus, the supra-
granular layer the granular 
layer go together even in
disease.

(hand-drawn diagram)

To draw general conclusions from his lecture, it appears to be fairly well 
established that the supragranular layer is the layer last to develop in evolution and that 
it is closely connected with the granular layer and it is not effector.

_____________

17.5.31.

Today I was engaged in my usual bad habit of day-dreaming. In one phantasy, a 
fairly short and simple one, I noticed that the phantasy developed, reached a satisfactory end point
and then stopped as if it had died out. This at once suggested to me that the phantasy,
pattern, or what you will, was developing and aiming at a particular end pattern and that when this 
is reached the first pattern just dies out. We may now ask whether this is general, whether 
all patterns try to develop to an end pattern, and whether all patterns die out when they get 
there. This is certainly reasonable. What, for instance, can be more acceptable from the 
point of view of virovanophilia than that a reaction should terminate? To get a reaction over

(111 of 260)

266.

and done with is obviously most desirable according to virovanophilia. And what 
could be a more reasonable ending point than when it arrives at the end-pattern?
This seems pretty reasonable all round. It shows also another example of a tendancy 
I noted in stereoscopic vision - that patterns tend to come together and to try to overlap 
as far as possible (principle of the superimposition of impulse patterns). From this it 
would appear that not only do impulse patterns tend to approximate to one another 
but that also the impulse patterns tend to approximate to the nearest basic pattern.
(We may note in passing that basic patterns do not seem to have this tendency, eg.
I am not aware of any tendency for the Father + Mother images to come together and 
fuse). If we assume that imagos are really basic patterns, then we have an 
obvious example of how the impulse patterns try to get as close as possible 
to the basic pattern. (Note here that if the father is identical with the Father imago,
the contentment follows, which equals zero reaction). 

We may note also the possibility of conflict for if there are two fairly 
similar basic patterns and an impulse pattern is thrown in which falls fairly 
evenly between the two, then the impulse pattern will be pulled equally in both 
directions and chaos of some sort will follow.

I think therefore that we may conclude that the basic patterns are many 
and varied (like the diagram p. 262) and that when an impulse pattern is thrown 
in, it tries to develop to get as close as possible to that pattern to which it is 
most similar.

(This, we may note, in some way affects the basic pattern; but how I am 
not yet prepared to say.)

__________


(112 of 260)

267. 

20.5.31.

With regard to the question on the previous page, it seems to me that the matter can 
be clarified by a little clear thinking, particularly so that the latter leads to a better 
orientation. Let us take first this question of an impulse pattern fitting the basic pattern 
and disappearing. We should note first that the impulse pattern may "disappear" by 
being turned into action, but at any rate, it disappears from the cortex. We noted 
that if it filled completely, it disappeared completely, which if it fits only in parts 
it may not disappear. Now this suggests that the pattern has some sort of cohesion, -
that one end of it influences the other end. Now this, I think must be rejected at 
once. The nerve cells are poor blind things, each one acting essentially independantly 
from its neighbours. Therefore we may conclude that if one little bit of impulse pattern
fits its little bit of basic pattern, then the impulses disappear, quite regardless of 
what the rest of the pattern may do. It is almost like the physical process of 
putting through a seve; any bit which is suitable for passing passes, while the 
rest is held back. We may therefore provisionally look upon the cortex as a 
sort of selective filter, and see where this new concept leads us. The filter will 
represent, so to speak, every reaction of which the individual is capable at that moment.
The actual reaction will be that part which gets through. Now where does this lead 
us?

___________

22.5.31.

To make a start on the mathematics of patterns.

Definition 1. A pattern is any group of points which may be arranged as lines, areas or solids.
Postulate 1. Any pattern may be moved en bloc in space at will.
Postulate 2. Any pattern may be moved en bloc, remains the same pattern.
Postulate 3. Points of one pattern may occupy the same space as points
of other patterns without interference, i.e. space is not "filled" by a pattern.

(113 of 260)

268.

Definition 2. Two patterns are said to be identical when they are capable of being 
put together, so that every point of one occupies the same space as a point 
of the other, i.e. when they are capable of complete and exact superimposition.
The addition of patterns. Two patterns are said to be added when they 
are combined to produce a third pattern. There are several ways of 
doing this. There is one type of addition where one simply considers the 
two patterns together. This gives, for two patterns, an infinite number of possible 
results, since the final pattern depends upon the spatial relationship between 
the two patterns. We will not consider this type, but will consider a 
more specialised type, corresponding more to what happens in the cortex, by 
defining addition as the combining of two patterns so that there shall be maximal overlap.

Definition 3. To add two patterns we move either pattern in space until 
the number of points of the one occupying the same space as points 
of the other, shall be a maximum. The result is a pattern.

Theorem 1. If two patterns are added, the resulting pattern is independant of 
which pattern is added to which.

i.e. to prove that if p(1) + p(2) - p(12)
then p(12) = p(21)

For consider the two patterns in empty space, then we cannot say which 
pattern is moving and which is standing still. All we know is that the two patterns
are approaching one another and moving about and through one another. They will 
settle down to a certain definite result. This result, therefore is independant of 
which one is moving.

Therefore p(1) + p(2) = p(12) = p(21) = p(2) + p(1)

(114 of 260)

269.

We may note that an impulse pattern, to be considered fully, must be 
considered to be a four dimensional pattern, composed (in reaction) of points which of occupy
space (since two points or impulses cannot be brought indefinitely close) and 
in four dimensions, since the points move, we have a "thread" pattern, which 
the threads never turning back (in time). 

(hand-drawn diagram) fig 1. 

"Flat man" in 3 dimensions with scheme of "impulse threads."

Therefore to study this type of pattern properly we should study 2 dimensional circle
patterns : - 

(hand-drawn diagram) fig 2. 

and three dimensional volume patterns : - 

(hand-drawn diagram) fig 3.

These, however, only deals with static, instantaneous impulse patterns. To add time we 
need another dimension, thus for Fig 2 we need a three dimensional thread pattern : -

(hand-drawn diagram) Fig 4.

To continue this with a basic pattern, we need to study the latter which appear to be 
generally fairly static patterns, of the point, or perhaps gradient, type : - 

(115 of 260)

270.

(hand-drawn diagram) Fig. 1 

Note that we must orientate these 
properly before we can combine them.
Note that although in Fig. 1 above we have represented the "quality" by a dimension 
this is not necessary, since Fig 1 may be represented by a surface pattern of colour
thus : -

(hand-drawn diagram) Fig 2. 

This must then be placed vertical to the time 
dimension in Fig 4 (p. 269), so that the impulse threads will move either towards or away 
from the dark parts. This, it may be noted corresponds not to an addition of patterns
but to an interaction of patterns -- quite a different (and more complex) matter.
We may note in passing that the continuous "state" of Fig 2 above, with the impulses 
passing along and being deflected corresponds closely to the concept of a potential-
-field in physics such as a field of magnetic force with electrons passing 
along and being deflected.

________

18.10.31.

Today I was cycling along from Leavesden, and trying steadily to keep slightly 
out of breath for fitness sake. It suddenly occurred to me that I was really under the 
influence of an almost unconcious urge to try and go faster and faster indefinitely. The 
essential point was simply that an unconcious urge, of imago type, became conscious.

The facility of which this change from unconcious to conscious can 
occur, without the phenomenon seeming to change very much suggests strongly
that the idea that the unconcious may be the basic pattern must be abandoned.
After all, what is the unconcious in terms of actual observed facts -- it consists 
of reactions which were first present, then presented from appearing, and which finally,

(116 of 260)

271. 

under analysis, may be made to reappear again. Obviously the phenomena 
observed cannot start as impulse patterns, then turn to basic pattern and then back 
again to impulse patterns - the change would be impossible since the impulse and 
basic patterns are so utterly different.

Notw, it appears clear now that the unconcscious is merely part of the "mind"
conscious, unconscious and what not; all are the same. The distinction between 
conscious and unconscious although searched from the psychological point of view,
is nil from the neurological point-of-view.

I have just been re-reading the last chapter of Freud's "Interpretation
of Dreams" but it has merely impressed me with the present impossibility of 
reconciling the purely neurological with the purely psychological. Such concepts 
as the "censor" "displacement of affect" "dramatisation" appear to me now to be extremely
abstract aspects of the general neuronic activity.

Further it has appeared to me that these particular analytic aspects of the general 
C.N.S. activity are, for my purpose, very artificial and probably misleading. There 
is no doubt that they are better avoided. It is better to stick purely to the general 
fundammental problem of given a nerve net, show how virovanophilia will inevitably
produce adaptation.

____________

18.10.31.

A good illustration of the futility of the "path" theory occurred to me today. Consider
the brain as a piano. If you strike one note, you would find that it was due to
one wire vibrating. If you strike another note you would find another were vibrating.
Therefore, it is assumed by some that a person is playing one melody after another, it 
means that there is one wire to each tune. This is exactly the same as the cortex

(117 of 260)

272.

Continued in Vol. III.

(pages 118 to 260: references and diagrams)
















 


